-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the processes about the Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy
(YBWS) 26 week suspension period.

Eligibility for the YBWS initiative

The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) will be
responsible for determining a job seeker's eligibility for the YBWS
initiative. They will send through an electronic notification to
Services Australia when a job seeker is placed into employment under the
YBWS initiative and if the current YBWS placement was 'Created In
Error'.

A job seeker will be eligible to participate in the YBWS initiative if
they satisfy all of the following:

-   they are under 25 years of age at the time of entering the YBWS
    initiative, and
-   in receipt of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA), and
-   is provider managed by a Workforce Australia, or
-   a Workforce Australia - Transition to Work (TTW) provider

Job seekers participating in the Community Development Program (CDP) or
with Disability Employment Services (DES) are excluded from this
initiative. Customers undertaking an apprenticeship are ineligible for
YBWS as they are not considered to be job seekers.

YBWS 26 Week Suspension Period

The YBWS suspension period will apply where a job seeker:

is employed under the YBWS initiative, and

has completed the 6 fortnight employment income nil rate period or if
they cease to qualify for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance
(YA) for an employment related reason. For example:

-   commence full-time, part-time or casual employment
-   have used all their working credit

Note: in some cases job seekers may not be paid enough employment income
to reduce their income support payment to nil, and therefore may not
enter the 26 week suspension period and will continue to receive income
support payments. The Resources page has additional information.

The job seeker's income support payment will auto-suspend (YBS) for a
period of 26 weeks and a notification letter will be issued advising the
job seeker that they have commenced the suspension period. This
suspension period is in place so that if at any time during the 26 week
period, the job seeker ceases their employment through no fault of their
own, or the current YBWS placement was 'Created In Error', their income
support payment can be restored.

If advice is received from DEWR that the current YBWS placement was
'Created In Error' and the customer's payment has a 'YBS/SUS' status, a
Manual Follow Up (MFU) activity will be present on the record. The MFU
activity will have:

-   the keyword 'YBWSUPD' to prompt staff to take further action
-   the text 'DEWR advised current YBWS placement was created in error.
    Manual follow-up required. See OpB 001-17030800 for details'

If a job seeker ceases employment through fault of their own, their
income support payment cannot be restored. The income support payment is
to be cancelled and the job seeker is to be told they have to lodge a
new claim. This may be subject to an unemployment preclusion period if
an unemployment failure has been committed.

At the end of the 26 weeks suspension period, the job seeker's income
support payment will cancel. Where a job seeker wants to return to
income support payments outside of the 26 week suspension period, they
will need to lodge a new claim.

Customer on leave without pay and has a job to return to

Customers on leave without pay for a period of time can have their
payment restored if they are able to satisfy mutual obligation
requirements including looking for work for the period they are on
leave. If a customer indicates they are not willing to look for work
during the leave period the payment should be cancelled as they are no
longer considered to be unemployed and have lost qualification as a job
seeker.

Reporting requirements

Job seekers employed under the YBWS initiative will be able to access
the Employment income nil rate period as per existing process. Job
seekers will need to continue to report until the YBWS suspension period
starts, to make sure they are able to access 6 fortnights at nil rate
and use their Working Credits. Failure to report may result in the YBWS
suspension commencing from the date they were last paid an Income
Support Payment (ISP) and the Employment income nil rate period will not
be entered.

Once the job seeker enters the YBWS Suspension period they will no
longer be required to report employment income during the YBWS 26 week
suspension period.

Customer starts an Australian Apprenticeship

If a customer contacts to advise they have commenced an Australian
Apprenticeship, see Existing customer starts an Australian
Apprenticeship.

Mutual obligation requirements

During the YBWS 26 week suspension period, the job seeker will not have
mutual obligation requirements and will be suspended from all servicing
(for example, will not need to attend provider appointments).

Job seekers placed in the YBWS initiative will be exited from their
Workforce Australia or Transition to Work (TTW) provider when they
commence the 26 week suspension period. They will not become Centrelink
managed.

Leave payments

Any leave or redundancy payments received on termination of employment
are to be assessed under the existing Income Maintenance Period rules.

Concession cards

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) job seekers will retain
their Health Care Card (HCC) or Pensioner Concession Card (PCC) during
an employment income nil rate period.

JSP and YA job seekers may continue to be qualified for their concession
card even after their payment has been suspended. For more information,
see Extended entitlement to Concession Cards.

JSP and YA job seekers serving the YBWS 26 week suspension period who
have their payments restored, will have their concession card
entitlement auto-restored.

Income managed job seekers

Income managed job seekers will be treated as being on income support
payments during the YBWS 26 week suspension period and continue to be
income managed.

Mobility Allowance

Job seekers can continue to receive Mobility Allowance (MOB) during the
YBWS 26 week suspension period. A job seeker's MOB entitlement will be
automatically reassessed when they enter the suspension period to
determine if they continue to meet the MOB eligibility.

Other payments, supplements and allowances

Where the job seeker is in the YBWS 26 week suspension period, they will
be treated as if they are 'cancelled and off income support' for all
other supplements, allowances and other payments including families
payments Rent Assistance (RA), and rate of payment for partners.

Where the job seeker is partnered and their partner is in receipt of
rent assistance, calculation of partner RA will be determined as though
the job seeker is no longer in receipt of an income support payment.

Where the job seeker is partnered and their partner is in receipt of an
income support payment, then the partner income test is to be determined
as though the job seeker who is in the YBWS 26 week suspension period is
no longer in receipt of an income support payment.

During the YBWS 26 week suspension period, job seekers will lose
eligibility to ACCS (Transition to work).

The Resources page contains links to additional information on the Youth
Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) initiative managed by Workforce Australia,
Transition to Work (TTW) and DEWR.

Related links

Working Credit

Employment income nil rate period

Participation Summary screen

BasicsCard

Income Management

Employment Separation Certificate (SU1)

Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Restoration of JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (job seeker) and
Special Benefit (SpB)

Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Health Care Card (HCC)

Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)

Reporting requirements for job seekers

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
