-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for determining if a job seeker has a
reasonable excuse for failing to comply with a compulsory mutual
obligation requirement.

Policy context for assessing reasonable excuse

Under the job seeker compliance system, a penalty may apply if a job
seeker fails to comply with a mutual obligation requirement. Reasonable
excuse provisions protect job seekers when events outside of their
control directly affect their ability to meet a compulsory requirement.

A reasonable excuse for failing to meet a compulsory requirement is also
one that an ordinary member of the community, or an employer, would
accept for an employee to miss work. Job seekers generally need to give
prior notice if they are unable to comply with a mutual obligation
requirement, just like an employee is expected to do in the event they
are unable to attend work.

Reasonable excuse assessment

Participation Solutions Team (PST) staff conduct a reasonable excuse
assessment as part of a compliance investigation.

PST staff consider the job seeker's reasons for non-compliance,
including if the reasons and/or circumstances:

-   were foreseeable or within the job seekers control
-   directly affected their ability to comply, and
-   are acceptable under the reasonable excuse provisions

PST staff also consider whether prior contact provisions have been met
(if required).

The legislation specifies factors that must be considered when assessing
reasonable excuse. It also specifies factors that must not be
considered. See the Process page for details.

Note: there are special rules about when drug and/or alcohol related
issues may be considered when making a decision about reasonable excuse.
See the Process page for details.

Prior contact assessment

If a job seeker is unable to attend an appointment or other compulsory
requirement, they must make prior contact with the appropriate person to
discuss the issue where it is reasonable to do so. Generally, it will be
the job seeker's provider, but it may be the activity supervisor in some
cases, for example, where the job seeker is doing Work for the Dole. Job
seekers in Workforce Australia Online should contact the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations' Digital Services Contact Centre to
give prior notice.

Prior contact usually occurs by phone, however, a job seeker and their
provider may agree to other arrangements such as sending an email or a
text message to the appropriate person or organisation.

Where reasonable excuse has been established for non-attendance at an
appointment or requirement, an assessment of prior contact is required.
The focus of the prior contact assessment is whether:

-   the job seeker has made prior contact with the appropriate person as
    required, or
-   it was unreasonable to expect them to do so

Assessing misconduct

Reasonable excuse provisions do not apply where the non-compliance event
involves misconduct from the job seeker. This includes:

-   inappropriate behaviour at a requirement, an appointment or job
    interview
-   unemployment due to misconduct

Misconduct investigations focus instead on if the incident:

-   was within the job seeker's control
-   occurred as reported

In the case of dismissal, PST staff should consider if the misconduct
was the primary reason for the job seeker's employment ending.

Assessing reasonable excuse - drug or alcohol related reasons

Jobseekers participating in Workforce Australia or DES cannot use drug
and/or alcohol dependence as a reasonable excuse more than once, unless
they agree to participate in appropriate treatment (where available).

Some job seekers can meet their mutual obligation requirements by
participating in treatment programs/interventions for drug and/or
alcohol dependency, see Drug or Alcohol dependency treatment program or
intervention as an approved activity.

The Resources page contains a link to the Family and Domestic Violence
Support Model (FDVSM).

Related links

Accessing a PST-skilled social worker

Altered mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due to
coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Circumstances impacting job seeker compliance

Drug or alcohol dependency treatment program or intervention as an
approved activity

Gathering and assessing evidence for a job seeker compliance
investigation

Assessing reasonable notice

Job Seeker Compliance for job seekers affected by a natural disaster or
declared emergency

Identifying barriers to participation for Indigenous customers

Rejecting a compliance action

Participation Compliance Hub

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
