
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes that apply where a job seeker fails
to enter into a Job Plan, or a ParentsNext participant fails to enter a
Participation Plan, without reasonable excuse.

Requirement to enter into or renegotiate a Job Plan or Participation Plan

Job seekers, including ParentsNext participants who are receiving a
participation payment are required to enter into, or renegotiate, a
Job/Participation Plan when notified of a requirement to do so.

Providers have responsibility for negotiating Job/Participation Plans
that set out the compulsory requirements a job seeker must comply with
in return for receiving a participation payment. When setting
requirements, the provider must ensure that:

-   the job seeker's personal circumstances and assessed capacity have
    been considered and requirements are ones that the job seeker is
    capable of meeting, and
-   compulsory requirements are consistent with relevant legislation and
    policies and do not exceed prescribed maximum limits set out in
    social security law

Job seekers are entitled to 'think time' if they have concerns about the
Job/Participation Plan, or express the need for further time to think
about the terms of a plan prior to entering into it (for example,
concerns about their ability to meet the terms).

Job seekers in Workforce Australia online can discuss the requirements
in their Job Plan with the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations' Digital Services Contact Centre if they wish to before
accepting their plan.

Think time does not apply where there is no intention to enter into a
Job/Participation Plan (such as, where the person is refusing to enter
into a Job/Participation Plan).

Refusal to enter into or renegotiate a Job Plan or a Participation Plan

Where the job seeker refuses to enter into, or renegotiate a
Job/Participation Plan, including unreasonably delaying entering into a
Job/Participation Plan, providers may initiate compliance action. The
appropriate job seeker compliance system will be used to re-engage the
job seeker.

Where the job seeker refuses to enter into or renegotiate a
Job/Participation Plan, cancellation of payments can be considered.

For job seekers managed by Services Australia or connected to Workforce
Australia Online, participation payments are not payable until they
enter into a Job Plan.

Managing non-compliance with a requirement to enter into a Job/Participation Plan - Targeted Compliance Framework

Under the Targeted Compliance Framework, where a provider managed job
seeker refuses to enter or renegotiate a Job/Participation Plan, a
mutual obligation failure has been committed.

When providers report the mutual obligation failure to Services
Australia, the job seeker's participation payments are automatically
suspended. The Services Australia system lifts the payment suspension
when the provider notifies the conditions for lifting the payment
suspension have been met.

Job seekers in the warning zone will accrue one demerit if the provider
is not satisfied the job seeker has a valid reason for refusing to enter
or renegotiate a Job/Participation Plan.

Job seekers in the financial penalty zone will incur a financial penalty
unless:

-   the job seeker satisfies their provider that they had a reasonable
    excuse for not entering into the Job/Participation Plan and the
    provider closes the Non-Compliance Report
-   the job seeker satisfies Services Australia during a compliance
    investigation that they had reasonable excuse for not entering into
    the Job/Participation Plan. Participation Solutions Team (PST)
    skilled Service Officers are responsible for conducting these
    compliance investigations

Managing non-compliance with a requirement to enter into a Job Plan - Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Upon receipt of the Participation Report submitted by the Community
Development Program (CDP) provider:

-   a connection failure for 'Failure to enter into a Job Plan' will be
    generated, and
-   the CDP job seeker will be sent a notification advising them to
    contact the Participation Solutions Team (PST) as soon as possible
    to discuss the non-compliance event

A PST skilled Service Officer will investigate the compliance action and
where the CDP job seeker does not provide a reasonable excuse for
failing to enter into a Job Plan, a connection failure will be applied.

Compliance investigation

In the first instance compliance action will involve the investigation
of a failure for not entering into a Job Plan. During the investigation
the CDP job seeker will be advised to attend a re-engagement appointment
and enter into a Job Plan. If the failure is applied and the CDP job
seeker again refuses to enter into a Job Plan (the second consecutive
refusal) then an ongoing failure to meet a condition of their payment
has been established and their payment should be manually cancelled,
recording the cancellation reason/code 'Failed to sign Job Plan' (FSA).
A second refusal to enter into a Job Plan may occur immediately or
sometime after the restated requirement when:

-   the failure is applied (for the first refusal) and the CDP job
    seeker again refuses to accept the requirement to enter into a Job
    Plan (for instance, they have either stated they will, or will not,
    attend the appointment but are not prepared to enter a Job Plan). As
    the second refusal has clearly been established by the CDP job
    seeker's statement their payment should be cancelled from the date
    of the second refusal
-   the CDP job seeker attends the re-engagement appointment but refuses
    to enter into a Job Plan when asked to do so, and a connection
    failure is subsequently generated and investigated for failing to
    enter into a Job Plan. Where it is determined that the CDP job
    seeker does not have a good reason for refusing to sign the Job
    Plan, the CDP job seeker's payment should be cancelled from the date
    of the second consecutive refusal
-   the CDP job seeker does not attend the re-engagement appointment and
    during the subsequent failure investigation the CDP job seeker
    indicates their reason for not attending the appointment is to avoid
    entering into a Job Plan. Again, payment should be cancelled from
    the date of the second consecutive refusal to sign the Job Plan

Ongoing refusal to enter into a Job Plan

The first and second refusal do not need to be consecutive failures (and
nor does a second failure need to be applied) however the two events
must represent an ongoing refusal to enter into a Job Plan before
cancellation of payment can be considered.

Cancellation of income support payment

When an income support payment is cancelled for failing to enter into a
Job Plan the CDP job seeker has lost qualification for the payment. This
means payment cannot be restored. If the CDP job seeker wishes to be
paid again they will need to lodge another claim and retest their
qualification.

If a 'Failed to sign Job Plan' (FSA) cancellation is recorded part way
through an entitlement period the CDP job seeker may be able to receive
payment up to (but not including) the date of cancellation. If a
Reporting Statement (SU19) is not lodged for this period then payment
may cancel 'Did not lodge' (DNL) or 'Failed to report' (FRP) which will
result in the system removing the FSA cancellation reason from the CDP
job seeker's record. The removal of the FSA cancellation reason does not
alter the decision to cancel payment due to an ongoing refusal to enter
into a Job Plan and the CDP job seeker is still required to lodge
another claim if they want to recommence payment. To ensure the correct
action is taken following an FSA cancellation a Display on Access DOC
should be created on the CDP job seeker's record with an expiry date 13
weeks in the future. The Display on Access DOC should include the reason
for cancellation, date of decision and the action to be taken if the CDP
job seeker wants to receive a participation payment again.

Related links

Provider responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Targeted Compliance Framework

Mutual obligation failures under the Targeted Compliance Framework

Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Investigating a connection failure

Conducting compliance investigations

Participation Compliance workflow

Coding a cancellation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
