-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to use the online diary to refer and manage
appointments for job seekers with Workforce Australia Employment
Services Providers including Disability Employment Services (DES)
Community Development Program (CDP) and Workforce Australia - Transition
to Work (TtW) providers.

Access to the Online Diary

The Online Diary:

is used to initiate referrals, check current appointments, the job
seeker's full appointment history and appointment outcomes

is available as a standalone function as well as forming part of both
the:

-   Participation Interview
-   Participation Summary in Process Direct

can be accessed from the Participation Interview or Participation
Summary for job seekers who have a requirement to be connected with a
provider and have their initial appointment booked where appropriate.
This includes job seekers who are exempt under certain RapidConnect
exemption reasons

When an appointment is made in the Online Diary, it will update the job
seeker's record with details of the referral. Services Australia will
also receive notification of the Diary appointment including
RapidConnect results, electronically via the Department of Employment
and Workplace Relations' Employment Services System (ESS).

Eligibility for referral to a provider

The interface with the ESS will automatically check a job seeker's
eligibility for referral. This includes checking that the job seeker:

-   has an active Job Seeker Identification Number
-   does not have an existing interview/workflow started
-   is/is not eligible for the referral attempting to be made

If a job seeker is not eligible this information will be displayed on
the referral screen and the system will not allow the referral to be
made.

Workforce Australia Online referrals

Most job seekers are automatically referred to the online service, with
selection and referral being undertaken by the Department of Employment
and Workplace Relations (DEWR) during the job seeker's Participation
Interview. Service Officers are blocked from using the Online Diary to
refer these job seekers to a Workforce Australia provider as they manage
their obligations through Workforce Australia Online (the online service
website).

The Online Diary will not feature in registration and referral workflows
for job seekers selected for Workforce Australia Online. These job
seekers will be automatically connected to the online service and given
instructions on how to participate and meet their mutual obligation
requirements by DEWR.

Choosing a provider using the Online Diary

Providers are listed in the Online Diary according to their earliest
available sessions. The list can be searched by postcode, provider name
and, for some providers, service centre or area of expertise.

When making the referral to Workforce Australia, Service Officers:

-   must advise the job seeker of available providers in their local
    area
-   should advise the job seeker that provider performance ratings are
    available to view, if interested, to inform their selection. See the
    Resources page - Workforce Australia â€“ Services Provider Performance
    Ratings
-   must not provide advice to job seekers about which provider to
    choose

For some providers, preferences and exclusions can be keyed to sort the
list of providers. If providers are 'full', 'closed' or 'not available'
they cannot be selected.

Services Australia does not have the functionality to change a provider
for a job seeker once the initial appointment has been booked. Service
Officers can contact the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations:

-   Employment Services Helpdesk, to correct a referral made to the
    wrong provider, or
-   National Customer Service Line, for requests to change a provider

Workforce Australia provider performance ratings

The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations rate all Workforce
Australia providers every 3 months.

Providers are rated based on a number of criteria determined by DEWR.
The rating received depends on how the provider is meeting government
expectations. See the Resources page for a link to the Workforce
Australia website containing further information on employment services
and individual provider ratings

Workforce Australia referrals

Job seekers will be referred to a Workforce Australia provider to access
the assistance for which they are eligible. The job seeker will remain
with that provider:

-   for the duration of their unemployment, or
-   until they reach the maximum time they are allowed with one
    Workforce Australia provider, or
-   until the Workforce Australia organisation no longer has a contract

Job seekers referred to Workforce Australia Online will remain with the
online service until DEWR deem it appropriate to refer them to a
Workforce Australia Employment Services Provider.

Maximum time transfers ensure job seekers who have been with the same
provider for an extended period without achieving an employment outcome
are transferred to a new provider. This will give job seekers different
servicing which may improve their prospects of getting a job.

Services Australia has no role in the maximum time transfer process as
this is calculated by the DEWR system. Job seekers with questions about
the transfer process should contact the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations.

DES - Specialist providers

Disability Employment Services (DES) - specialist provider's details are
also displayed on the List Providers screen. Service Officers should
advise the job seeker of the specialist provider details and that they
provide services to all job seekers, not just those who require
additional services.

Service Officers may provide job seekers with information to assist them
with choosing a provider, however they should not choose a provider for
them. Where a job seeker does not want to choose a provider the random
allocation process must be used.

CDP providers

Community Development Program (CDP) regions are only serviced by one CDP
provider. The job seeker does not have the option of selecting their
provider. CDP providers will not have a star rating or specialist
information.

Workforce Australia - Transition to Work (TtW) providers

Workforce Australia - Transition to Work (TtW) is available across
Australia except in remote areas serviced by Community Development
Program providers. If the job seeker is TtW eligible and there are no
TtW providers in the job seeker's region, the job seeker must be
referred to a Workforce Australia Employment Services Provider. Where a
local TtW provider is displayed in the Online Diary, but no appointments
are available, Service Officers must contact the TtW provider, and
request an appointment timeslot be opened to facilitate the referral.
However, job seekers can insist on a referral to Workforce Australia
Employment Services Provider.

Timeframes and appointment requirements for referrals to Workforce Australia and CDP providers

The Online Diary has the facility for appointments to be made up to 6
weeks into the future for Workforce Australia and CDP providers.
However, job seekers are required to have appointments as soon as
possible, preferably within 2 working days of the Participation
Interview being conducted.

Job seekers who are subject to RapidConnect provisions and are not
referred to Workforce Australia Online, are required to have an
appointment with a provider within 2 working days of:

-   the Participation Interview being conducted, and
-   being advised of their obligation to attend a RapidConnect
    appointment

If an appointment is not available within 2 days, an appointment within
the next 14 calendar days may be selected. Contact with the provider
should be made in order to seek an appropriate appointment. However, if
additional provider sessions are not able to be arranged with any
providers in the job seeker's local area within 14 calendar days, the
job seeker will be exempt from RapidConnect requirements. The job seeker
will still need to have the next available initial appointment booked
with the provider.

Job seekers re-registering

Where a job seeker re-registers within the allowable break (13 weeks)
and was previously connected to a Workforce Australia, TtW or CDP
provider, they will be reconnected to the same provider. There is no
requirement for the Service Officer to book the initial appointment for
the job seeker in this instance and they would be exempt from
RapidConnect.

Job seekers in CDP regions will be re-registered with the CDP provider
for that region. If the job seeker has moved to a non CDP region, they
will be able to select a Workforce Australia provider of their choice.

Rescheduling appointments

Services Australia, Workforce Australia, TtW and CDP providers can
reschedule the RapidConnect or initial appointment with the job seeker
as long as the appointment is still in the future and no result has
previously been recorded for that appointment. 'Created in Error' can be
input for DES Referrals, which will cancel the whole referral.

When the appointment is rescheduled, Service Officers need to ensure
that the job seeker is advised about their appointment details verbally
or in writing.

Special considerations for RapidConnect appointments

If a job seeker is subject to the RapidConnect provisions, rescheduling
their RapidConnect appointment may affect their income support payment.
Service Officers are required to determine whether a request to
reschedule a RapidConnect appointment is for an acceptable reason and
the new appointment must be booked within 14 days from the date the
Online Participation Workflow was run.

Where the RapidConnect appointment date has passed or an appointment
result has already been keyed, the RapidConnect appointment can no
longer be rescheduled, and the appointment will need to be rebooked.

See Processes for RapidConnect appointments to reschedule and rebook
RapidConnect appointments.

Rebooking RapidConnect appointments

If the provider has not re-booked the initial RapidConnect appointment
and the job seeker either attends or contacts Services Australia, the
Service Officer can rebook the appointment using the Online
Participation Workflow if the original claim was completed online. If
there are no appointments available, contact the provider and request an
initial appointment for the job seeker. This appointment should be
within 14 days of Participation Interview being conducted, to ensure the
job seeker is paid from the correct start date under RapidConnect rules.

Notification of appointments

After an appointment is selected, on the Appointment Detail page within
the Online Diary, Service Officers need to state whether the job seeker
is notified of the provider appointment via:

-   Face-to-face notification, or
-   Phone notification

In addition, Service Officers must ensure there is a DOC recorded with
of the contact made with the job seeker, and that verbal notification
has been given, and is recorded on a DOC.

Appointment results

Services Australia can view the appointment outcomes entered by
providers. These results are 'Attended', 'Cancelled', 'Created in
Error', 'Did not Attend Valid' or 'Did not Attend Invalid'.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations and a link to the Workforce Australia
website.

Related links

Employment Services Providers

Selection or allocation of a Workforce Australia organisation

RapidConnect

Participation Interview

Assessing reasonable notice

Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES)

Workforce Australia - Transition to Work (TtW)

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â 

-   Services Australia ABN 90Â 794Â 605Â 008Â 
