-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when it is appropriate for Participation
Solutions Team (PST) staff to send additional information to Employment
Services Providers following a decision to reject a compliance action.

Where 'job seeker' is referenced, this includes Community Development
Program (CDP) participants.

Releasing information to Employment Services Providers

Section 202 of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999 provides
Services Australia with the authority to disclose information to
Employment Services Providers to assist delivery of employment services
to job seekers.

This includes the reason why a decision is made, or information
collected during the compliance investigation that affects the job
seeker's ability to meet their requirements and/or that may affect how
the provider delivers employment services.

The authority to collect and disclose information to Employment Services
Providers is delivered to job seekers via the privacy message. The
privacy message is delivered to job seekers during every contact with
PST:

-   via IVR, or
-   when it is read out as part of a compliance action within the
    Participation Compliance workflow

Recording a decision to reject a failure

As part of recording a decision to reject a failure, PST staff are
required to select the most appropriate rejection reason. This allows
the provider to understand why the decision was made.

In addition, PST staff should use the free text field to give more
information to the provider about why a failure was rejected.

Access to information

Job seekers, under the Freedom of Information Act 1982, can obtain
information recorded in the Participation Compliance workflow, including
information sent to providers relating to reasons a failure was
rejected.

The Resources page contains scenarios of when it is appropriate to
include additional information about the reason a failure has been
rejected.

Related links

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

Rejecting a compliance action

Reviewing and validating Community Development Program (CDP) Provider
Reports

Participation Compliance Hub

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
