-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the referral process for Skills for Education and
Employment (SEE). It includes the process for when Services Australia
can complete the referral, and when it cannot.

Identifying and coding SEE referrals

A job seeker's need for language, literacy, numeracy or digital literacy
assistance is identified by their responses to the Job Seeker Snapshot
questions and/or their need for interpreter assistance during contact
with the Agency.

The following items are created on the customer's record from the Job
Seeker Snapshot:

-   an action item on the Participation Summary screen in Process Direct
    with a message - Action referral to AMEP/SEE
-   a JSR Manual Follow-up (MFU) message on the Activity List (AL)
    screen in Customer First stating - The Customer would benefit from
    referral to either SEE or AMEP program. Please make the referral

These action items are prompts to discuss the benefits of participating
in SEE with the job seeker. If the job seeker agrees, the Service
Officer makes a referral to SEE and books the one hour appointment for a
Pre-Training Assessment with the SEE provider.

Contacting the SEE provider for Pre-training Assessment appointments

The Service Officer must:

-   obtain the jobseeker's consent to pass on their personal details to
    the SEE provider
-   contact the SEE provider to make an appointment for the Pre-Training
    Assessment while the jobseeker is present
-   tell the job seeker the date, time and location of the appointment

Following this appointment, if assessed as suitable for training, the
SEE provider will commence the job seeker in SEE.

Referral for YA (job seekers) and Early School Leavers

Job seekers aged from 15 to 21 years, in receipt of Youth Allowance (YA)
(job seeker) will be RapidConnect exempt if they are identified as
eligible for SEE through their responses to the Job Seeker Snapshot.

If the referral to SEE is not made at the time of claim, the Action
Item/MFU is left open to prompt discussion at a later contact. The job
seeker must be connected with an employment services provider
immediately.

Later, if the job seeker accepts the referral to SEE, follow the steps
in the Process page to book an appointment.

Note: if the young person is currently registered in the Services
Australia ICT system as a child, the Service Officer will need to first
promote the job seeker's record to adult status to enable a referral to
be made.

Provider managed job seekers

If a referral to SEE is required for a provider managed job seeker, and:

-   the job seeker is managed by a Workforce Australia Employment
    Services Provider, the Service Officer must contact the provider to
    discuss referring the job seeker to SEE. The discussion can be with
    any staff member at the provider office, not just the job seeker's
    Case Manager. Unless the provider has reasonable grounds to oppose
    the referral to SEE, such as the job seeker is about to commence
    employment, the Service Officer should book the one hour Pre
    Training Assessment appointment and provide the details to the job
    seeker. The provider monitors the job seeker's ongoing participation
    in the program
-   The job seeker is managed by Workforce Australia Online, tell them
    to contact the Digital Services Contact Centre and ask for a SEE
    referral

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements continue in provider
services while they participate in SEE, when connected to Workforce
Australia, Workforce Australia Online, Community Development Program
(CDP), Disability Employment Services (DES), Australian Disability
Enterprises (ADE) or Workforce Australia - Transition to Work (TtW).

ESAt, JCA and SEE

Job seekers who are identified as requiring language, literacy, numeracy
or digital literacy training, may also require:

-   an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt), when claiming a job seeker
    payment, or
-   a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA), when claiming Disability Support
    Pension (DSP)

Service Officers may also refer and book the job seeker to a SEE
provider for a Pre-Training Assessment appointment as well as referring
them for an ESAt or JCA. Advise the Employment Services Assessor of the
SEE appointment by updating the notes section of the Online Diary.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
further information about the Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement
(LLNS) and to the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
(DEWR) SEE homepage. It also contains information and links to distance
education and other providers offering SEE.

Related links

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Eligibility for Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Participation in Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
