
If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

The Social work phone line is available during extended operating hours.
Use the Social Work Line or see Social work service referral for more
details.

This document outlines information for Services Australia social workers
about assessments and assistance that may be offered to support a young
person at risk.

Child safe framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse.

A staff member must act when they see or hear behaviour which raises
concern about a child or young person’s safety. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child.

Referrals

Assessments and assistance for young people at risk may include:

-   assessing supports available and any risk to an unsupported child or
    young person
-   referring the young person to Reconnect or other services
-   engaging the young person in short term, more intensive social
    casework
-   conducting an unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) assessment
-   conducting an assessment of care on an informal basis where a child
    may be at risk of harm
-   conducting a Child Support non-parent carer assessment

If there are reasonable grounds to believe that a young person under 18
years has been subjected to or is at risk of abuse, serious harm or
violence, or they are under 15 years and homeless or unsupported the
Services Australia social worker will make a Youth Protective Assessment
referral to the relevant State or Territory Welfare Authority. The State
or Territory Welfare Authority will then provide advice to the referring
social worker on the outcome of that assessment and recommend and
support any follow-up action.

Obtaining customers consent

Social workers should ensure that they obtain the customer's consent
prior to referring them to a community agency or government service. The
purpose of the referral and the information to be provided to the agency
should be discussed with the customer and their agreement documented.

If the customer does not give their consent but there is a threat to the
life, health or welfare of a person, a Services Australia's delegate can
release information to police or a child protection agency. Officers
delegated to release information include APS6 social workers and above.
Special consideration needs to be taken if the young person is under 16
years of age.

Contents

Unsupported under 16 year olds to be immediately referred to a Services
Australia social worker

Social worker's role regarding Youth Protective Assessments

Assisting a customer aged under 16

Conducting a social worker unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH)
assessment

Conducting an assessment of care on an informal basis where a child may
be at risk of harm

Conducting a Child Support non-parent carer assessment

Related links

Social casework

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Homelessness Indicators

Circumstances impacting job seeker compliance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
