-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines an explanation of how parents can claim Parental
Leave Pay (PPL), and/or Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a newborn child and
enrol the child in Medicare and the Medicare Safety Net, My Health
Record and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

How to claim for a newborn child

[] Encourage customers to make an early claim online. This provides
customers with a streamlined experience and is the preferred service
offer. Ensure customers have 'active' online account access before
directing them to claim online.

If a customer contacts and is deemed unable or unsuitable to complete an
online claim, a verbal claim for Paid Parental Leave and family
assistance may be appropriate. The Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)
workflow can be completed for these customers. See Online and Assisted
Customer Claims (ACC) for Family Assistance, Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP). Other payments have their own procedures
for claimants who cannot claim online.

Families in crisis or remote Indigenous customers

For families in crisis who are experiencing difficulty in understanding
or complying with claim requirements, or that require a speedy outcome
to meet immediate financial needs, or remote Indigenous customers who
have language or literacy barriers affecting their capacity to use forms
or online claims, a verbal claim for Paid Parental Leave and family
assistance may be appropriate. These customers may also be eligible to
submit a verbal signature declaration.

See:

-   Helping customers in crisis or financial hardship claim family
    assistance, or
-   Assisting Indigenous customers to claim family assistance and/or
    Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

A separate procedure applies for claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

Nominees

Nominees do not have access to lodge online claims (with the exception
of claims for Approved Child Care Benefit lump sum claims and Child Care
Subsidy (CCS)). Therefore correspondence nominees are to be offered an
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) if available when they want to apply for a
family’s payment on behalf of their principal. If they decline ACC or it
is not available, then a paper-based claim form will need to be issued.

Child adoptions and bereavements

Separate procedures apply for customers claiming:

-   for a child entering care as part of an adoption process or
    surrogacy arrangement
-   for a child leaving care as part of an adoption process or surrogacy
    arrangement
-   after a stillbirth
-   after the death of a child (including soon after birth)

Verification of birth

The Newborn Child Declaration (FA081) is not a claim form but can be
used to verify the birth of a child when applying for Paid Parental
Leave scheme payments (Parental Leave Pay and Dad and Partner Pay),
family assistance, Medicare enrolment and a My Health Record.

Each FA081 has a unique serial number on the back page. The serial
number is recorded when the customer lodges the FA081 as proof of birth
for a newborn child.

[] If a pre-birth claim has been lodged and assessed as pending proof of
birth, customers can then use the ‘Add newborn child’ service online or
'Add child service' via Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to provide
the details of their newborn child and upload the Doctor/Midwife Proof
of Birth declaration.

Note: this will also appear as a ‘task' on the landing page on the
customer's online account and/or mobile app.

Customers who do not have the FA081 can provide alternate proof of birth
(for example birth certificate) to support their claim and/or Medicare
enrolment, but child details and a claim must still be provided.

-   Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth
-   Processing proof of a child's birth

The FA081 can be used across Centrelink and Medicare programmes as proof
of birth. Additional information may be required (for example, a claim
for payment), but do not ask for another proof of birth document if the
FA081 is already receipted on the customer record.

[] Electronic Proof of Birth (EPoB) provided by participating hospitals
as part of the Newborn Enrolment Trial.

Parents must confirm child information through the Add Newborn child
service online or via the Add child service in the Express Plus mobile
app to utilise the EPoB as valid proof of birth.

Once a customer has confirmed the EPoB information through the Add
Newborn child service, these activities will be allocated to pilot staff
and the EPoB can be used:

-   create a child record
-   as proof of birth of a child if the customer has lodged a pre-birth
    claim for FTB and/or PPL
-   complete Medicare enrolment and register child for a My Health
    Record

See Newborn Enrolment Trial for more information about the trial and how
to help customers with their enquiries.

Timeframes for claiming

[] Encourage customers to lodge an early claim for family assistance
and/or Parental Leave Pay (PPL) online. Claims can be lodged up to 97
days before the child’s expected date of birth or entrustment to care as
part of an adoption process.

Claims can be lodged up to 52 weeks after their child’s date of birth or
entrustment to care, but advise customers of the time limits for
claiming the maximum PPL period.

For children born or adopted before 1 July 2023:

-   For Parental Leave Pay to be paid from the date of birth or entry
    into care, the customer must lodge an effective claim with their
    child’s proof of birth/entry into care details within 28 days of the
    birth/entry into care
-   The 28 day period commences the day after the date of birth/entry
    into care. If the customer lodges their claim or provides the
    required information after the 28 days, the earliest possible PPL
    period start date is the date of claim

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023:

-   Where a customer claims Parental Leave Pay proof or birth or entry
    into care must be provided within 56 days of the child’s birth or
    entry into care otherwise the claim will be made Not Effective
-   If proof or birth or entry into care is provided, a customer can
    have their PPL days backdated up to 100 days in the past, but not
    before the child’s date of birth or entry into care

Customer in crisis or in hardship

For a family in crisis requiring urgent family assistance claim
processing, only certain team leaders or specialists should contact the
Team Leader in the local processing team to facilitate urgent
processing.

For a family experiencing financial hardship requiring urgent family
assistance claim processing, ensure the claim can be actioned before
transferring the customer to the Families and Child Care Branch Claim
Enquiry line. The Smart Centre Service Officer will action the claim if
possible or assess the appropriateness of a priority referral to
Families Processing. If not trained in that claim type, the Smart Centre
Service Officer will use the Families Claim Escalation - Hardship Fast
Note to prioritise the claim. See, Helping customer in crisis or
financial hardship claim family assistance.

For all other urgent claim processing, staff must follow protocols for
claims under day 35 and over day 35 as set out on the Process page of
Child enters customer's care/custody.

Customers overseas

Claims lodged by customers who are overseas, or who will be going
overseas within 21 days of claiming, are transferred to Families
International Claims (FIC) to be finalised.

If the customer is overseas when they claim and the child was born
overseas, an FA100 is to be issued if the customer is not claiming
online. This includes FTB current customers claiming while overseas. The
FA100 can be downloaded online or mailed to the customer overseas.

Various documents can be accepted as proof of birth for children born
overseas.

Medicare enrolment

If the customer advises their family has not enrolled in Medicare, the
Medicare Safety Net, or My Health Record (where consent is provided),
tell them to contact Medicare to arrange this.

If the customer is already enrolled for Medicare but their newborn is
not yet enrolled, the child's information provided in the online claim,
'Add newborn child' service or on the completed FA081 can be used to
enrol the newborn child. This information will be transferred to
Medicare when provided via a Centrelink service.

The child’s Medicare details are used to establish a link with the
Australian Immunisation Register to receive their immunisation status
for FTB.

PPL days

PPL includes:

-   for children born or adopted before 1 July 2023, 30 Flexible PPL
    days in addition to a 60 day PPL period
-   for children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023, 100 PPL days

Customers will be assessed for these days when they claim PPL. They can
access these at a later time without the need to lodge a new claim for
PPL.

The Resources page contains an example of the 28 day count for the start
date of the PPL period, links to contact details and Services Australia
website, relevant forms and publications, and resources including the
Newborn Supplement (NBS) maximum rate map and information about claim
signature requirements.

Related links

Online estimator options

Online and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) for Family Assistance,
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Helping customers in crisis or financial hardship claim family
assistance

Initial contact with refugees, humanitarian entrants and protection visa
holders

Assisting Indigenous customers to claim family assistance and/or Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Initial contact after the death of a potential family assistance and
Paid Parental Leave scheme customer

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Processing proof of a child's birth

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Newborn Enrolment Trial – Birth of a Child pilot

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
