-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how families can claim the annual Single Income
Family Supplement (SIFS) for any period in the assessment year. SIFS can
be paid from July 2013 for the 2012-13 assessment year to 30 June 2017
for new and existing recipients. For the financial years 2017-18
onwards, SIFS will only be payable to existing recipients if
grandfathering provisions are met.

SIFS eligibility

Families eligible for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) do not need to claim
SIFS. Their SIFS entitlement will be automatically calculated:

-   during the FTB reconciliation process, or
-   when their FTB lump sum claim is assessed

They do not need to lodge a separate SIFS claim unless they wish to
claim for a period they had a qualifying child for SIFS but were not
eligible for FTB.

For eligibility for SIFS and the grandfathering provisions applying from
1 July 2017, see Single Income Supplement (SIFS).

The Resources page contains Ready Reckoners for staff use.

Claiming SIFS

Non-FTB recipients will need to lodge a separate SIFS claim each year.
SIFS is not payable to new recipients from 1 July 2017, however existing
recipients may be eligible if they meet the grandfathering provisions.

Non-FTB recipients, or recipients who lodge via an FTB lump sum claim
who are grandfathered, must still make a claim each year.

Customers have 12 months from the end of an entitlement year to lodge
their SIFS claim. For example by 30 June 2021 for 2019-20 financial
year.

Families prevented from lodging their claim by the end of the lodgement
year may be granted a special circumstances extension to meet the
requirement. A decision about a special circumstances extension cannot
be made until the customer has lodged a SIFS claim for the relevant
financial year.

[] Families will need to lodge a claim online. An online claim for an
entitlement year will only be available during the lodgement year.

Families unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim, or where a
grandfathered customer wishes to lodge a SIFS claim after the end of the
lodgement year - will need to be completed using Assisted Customer
Claims (ACC).

A special circumstances assessment cannot be undertaken until a claim
for the relevant financial year has been lodged.

Required information/documents

Families claiming online are advised when they submit their claim of any
documents they will need to provide to support their claim. This can
include:

-   proof of Australian residence status if the person is not an
    Australian citizen born in Australia
-   proof of birth for the child (if not previously provided)

Taxable income

SIFS claims can only be assessed once adequate taxable income details
are available for the customer and their partner/ex-partner for the
relevant financial year.

A customer has 12 months from the end of an entitlement year to confirm
income for themselves and their partner/ex-partner, by either:

-   lodging tax returns with the ATO, or
-   advising they are not required to lodge a tax return and providing a
    reasonable estimate of their income

Families prevented from confirming income by the end of the lodgement
year may be granted a special circumstances extension to meet the
requirements.

Note: SIFS entitlement is based on taxable income only, not adjusted
taxable income (ATI).

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website and
SIFS Ready Reckoners.

Related links

Online estimator options

Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Online and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) for Single Income Family
Supplement (SIFS)

Processing Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) claims

Assessing special circumstances extensions for families unable to meet
lodgement and other specific requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Online and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) for Single Income Family
Supplement (SIFS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
