
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about assessable income for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS), Stillborn Baby Payment
(SBP), Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

Assessable income

When providing estimates, it is essential customers are asked about each
income component to ensure their estimate includes all components.

Assessable income includes the following income components:

-   taxable income
-   exempt reportable fringe benefits
-   reportable fringe benefits
-   reportable superannuation contributions
-   total net investment losses (which includes net rental property
    losses)
-   foreign income
-   tax exempt foreign income
-   tax free benefits and pensions
-   less child maintenance expenditure

Note: from 1 January 2017 the method of assessment of fringe benefits
changed. Customers must advise if the fringe benefit amount is a
reportable fringe benefit or an exempt reportable fringe benefit. See
Assessing fringe benefits for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments for more information.

A superannuation withdrawal under the First Home Super Saver (FHSS)
Scheme is not counted towards taxable income.

There is no Assets Test for family assistance or Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments.

Annual income for FTB/CCS

FTB

Customers must estimate their (and their partner's) adjusted taxable
income (ATI) for the full financial year.

A partner's ATI is included in the customer's combined ATI only for the
period they were partnered to that person. If the partner dies during
the relevant financial year, their ATI is converted to an annual amount.

CCS

Customers must also estimate their (and their partner's) ATI for the
full financial year.

Where a customer was partnered for part of the relevant year, only the
applicable proportion of the partner’s/ex-partner’s/deceased partner’s
income, based on the period they were partnered, is included in the
actual income used for assessment.

If the customer's partner died during the relevant financial year, the
proportioning assessment also includes annualised actual income of the
deceased partner for the period they were a couple. See Reconciliation
of Child Care Subsidy.

If the person is required to lodge a tax return for the relevant
financial year, actual income details transferred electronically from
the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) are used for FTB/CCS reconciliation
and lump sum claim assessment.

Estimate for SBP

When claiming SBP for a stillborn child, customers must provide an
estimate of their adjusted taxable income (ATI) for the 6 month period
beginning on the day the stillborn child was delivered.

An estimate of their partner's ATI must also be provided if the customer
is partnered on the day they claim.

Estimate for PPL/DAP

For PPL claims for children born before 1 July 2023, an estimate of the
primary carer's ATI is required for the financial year preceding the
date of their claim or the date of the child's birth/entry into care.

For PPL claims for children born on or after 1 July 2023, a family
income test may apply, in addition to the individual income test. If the
customer does not meet the individual income test, then the family
income test limit is applied. This applies to both single and partnered
customers. An estimate of the claimant’s ATI is required for the
financial year prior to the date of their claim or the date of the
child's birth/entry into care.

For DAP claims, an estimate of the claimant's ATI is required for the
financial year preceding the date of their claim or their nominated
start date.

Note: DAP is not payable for children born or adopted on or after 1 July
2023. Fathers and partners will need to claim PPL.

See Paid Parental Leave income test and previous financial year income
estimate

Contents

Taxable income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Assessing fringe benefits for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Reportable superannuation contributions from 2009-10 for family
assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

Total Net Investment Losses for family assistance and Parental Leave Pay
(PPL)

Foreign income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Tax-free pensions and benefits for family assistance and Paid Parental
Leave scheme payments, and the Parental Income Test for Youth Allowance,
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children

Deductible Child Maintenance Expenditure (DCME)

Related links

Assessing income and assets for ministers of religion

Assessing scholarship income

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Updating previous financial year incomes for Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Processing claims for Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

Paid Parental Leave income test and previous financial year income
estimate

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy

Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit
(CCB) reconciliation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
