[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding the Mutual Customer
Identification (MCI) process between Centrelink and the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO) to ensure customers receive the correct
entitlement of Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and
Child Care Benefit (CCB).

On this Page:

Changes to family assistance

An important aspect of the changes to family assistance from 1 July 2000
was the concept of reconciling a customer's entitlement after the end of
each financial year so that customers are paid correctly based on their
actual income for that financial year.

Reconciling FTB, CCS and CCB

Where customers have received FTB instalments or CCS/CCB fee reductions
and are lodging a tax return, Centrelink will obtain their actual income
details from the ATO to reconcile their payments.

To reconcile amounts of FTB, CCS and CCB paid during a particular
financial year, Centrelink is required to establish a link with the ATO.
This link is necessary to identify mutual customers of the ATO and
Centrelink.

TFN matching process

The use of Tax File Numbers is critical in the matching process.
Correctly matching customers ensures that correct income details are
transferred from the ATO for the customer (and their partner) for
reconciliation of their FTB/CCS/CCB.

When ATO has flagged a customer record as a mutual customer they will
advise Centrelink of the match and following assessment of the tax
return, pass income information to Centrelink for use in the
reconciliation process.

Terminating link with ATO

The link will be terminated three years after the relevant financial
year, unless the customer has an outstanding FTB non-lodger debt. This
ensures that Centrelink does not receive income information for a
taxation year that it has no legal basis to collect (and protects the
privacy of the individual). After the three years, to confirm actual
income details customers will need to provide proof directly to
Centrelink.

For customers with outstanding FTB non-lodger debts, the link can be
extended from the 2000/01 financial year.

Contents

Mutual Customer Identification (MCI) process for family assistance
customers

Mutual Customer Identification (MCI) results for family assistance
customer mismatches

Mutual Customer Identification (MCI) for family assistance customers
with status of Centrelink Pending (CPN)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
