-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines how to assess a claim for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL). Customers may have submitted a claim online for PPL, lodged a
claim form or provided information required to finalise an assessed or
pending PPL claim. Customers can claim PPL for a newborn or for a
recently adopted child aged under 16 years.

Claim requirements

For PPL to be paid, the customer must:

-   meet all the PPL eligibility requirements
-   [] submit an online claim or lodge a paper claim before the child's
    first birthday or anniversary of the date the child entered care if
    adopted (early claims may be lodged within the family assistance,
    PPL and DAP allowable early claim period)
-   provide acceptable proof of birth or adoption
-   provide all information and documentation required to assess the
    claim

For PPL claims for children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023, a
person must have care of a child on their PPL days (Exception: this does
not apply after a child has dies or was stillborn, or if care of the
child is lost without legal authority). Birth mothers do not need to
claim PPL first, or at all, in order for the other parent or partner to
get PPL. Either parent or their partner can claim PPL first. All
claimants must be eligible on their PPL days.

For PPL Claims for children born or adopted before 1 July 2023,
customers will be assessed initially as a primary claimant. If primary
claimant eligibility is not met, they will be assessed as a secondary
claimant and in some cases a tertiary claimant.

Payment of FTB

Customers may apply for PPL and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) at the same
time. Customers can choose to claim PPL or to have their entitlement to
Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) assessed with
their FTB Part A. Customers can also choose to claim PPL even after
NBS/NBU have been paid with FTB. See Claim choice for a newborn or
adopted child.

FTB Part B is not payable on days that the customer is receiving PPL. To
avoid an overpayment of FTB Part B while their PPL claim status is
assessed awaiting employer acceptance (EIA) or registration (EIR), the
customer will not be paid FTB Part B until the PPL claim is either
granted or rejected. Once the employer acceptance is recorded, the
customer will be granted PPL from the PPL start date or will be paid
arrears of FTB Part B for this period.

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023, FTB Part B will
not be payable for PPL days which are claimed on a weekday (Monday to
Friday). However, where a claimed PPL day falls on a weekend, FTB Part B
will be payable.

Straight through processing

Straight through processing is where a claim or service is assessed
using criteria to identify if it is suitable for an automated grant
outcome.

The system may process pre-birth claims for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
automatically if they meet certain criteria.

If a claim meets the criteria for an automated assessment, DOCs or
Display Notes on the customer's record will show that ROXY has created
these.

If it does not meet the business rules for an automatic assessment it
will be allocated to staff to manually process.

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the decision, the Service Officer must enter their own logon as the
Decision Maker and the customer's local service centre when running the
script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY.

Processing PPL claims

Families Smart Centre Processing Services staff process claims. They
process:

-   PPL only claims in Process Direct
-   FTB/PPL combined claims in Customer First

For overseas customers or where it is indicated the customer will depart
overseas within 21 days of making the claim, claims are transferred to
Families International Claims (FIC) to be finalised

In Process Direct

In Inbox, search for the Claim ID or Customer Reference Number (CRN).
For paper claims, a Social Application (SOA) shell Work Item is
generated. This new claim SOA activity contains no claim information
apart from the CRN, personal details and the receipt date (date of
claim).

In Customer First

In Workspace, use Online Claims > Search Online Claims. For paper
claims, use Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) first to record claim details
on the customer's record.

PPL rate and deductions

Once granted, PPL is paid at the national minimum wage rate for up to:

-   18 weeks (90 payable days) for children born or adopted before 1
    July 2023
-   20 weeks (100 payable days) for children born or adopted on or after
    1 July 2023

PPL is not subject to income management.

Centrepay deductions can be arranged from PPL delivered by Services
Australia. If delivered by the employer, the customer must negotiate
voluntary deductions with the employer. The Rent Deduction Scheme is not
available for PPL.

PPL ASSessed, CURrent and current zero rate (CZR) benefit status

Once a customer’s claim for PPL is granted, the claim status will be:

-   assessed (ASS), if initial eligibility criteria are met pending
    proof of birth/entry into care/placement, start date or further
    action from the employer
-   current (CUR), on a day or during a period a customer is eligible
    and payable for PPL
-   current at zero rate (CZR),where there is a break between payable
    PPL days

The Resources page contains example text for a Q999 letter, scenarios
and examples for applying the correct PPL start date and a link to the
guide to Australian Government Payments. It also contains keyword
explanations for PPL pre-birth claims excluded from automation. For
Processing staff, it also outlines claim signature requirements and
action to take if the requirements have not been met.

Related links

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave Payments

Assessing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Cancellation, rejection, not effective, assessed and current zero rate
codes for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Processing proof of a child's birth

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Eligibility for Paid Parental Leave (PPL) for children born or entering
care on or after 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary
claimant for children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Claiming and managing Flexible Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Determining a customer’s Paid Parental Leave (PPL) period start date for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Delivery of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Information requests for FTB, PPL, DAP and CCB lump sum claims

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL)

Paid Parental Leave scheme claims income test and previous financial
year income estimates

Process for when a Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claim is processed with
incorrect nominated start date

Rate of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Straight through processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
