-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines how an early claim can be lodged for Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) before a child's expected
date of birth or entrustment to care as part of an adoption process.

Early claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Early claims can be lodged up to 97 days before a child's expected date
of birth or entrustment to care as part of an adoption process.

Proof of the child's birth or entrustment to care must be provided for
the claim to be finalised.

Paid Parental Leave (PPL)

Early claims can be lodged up to 97 days before a child's expected date
of birth or entrustment to care as part of an adoption process.

For children born before 1 July 2023, secondary/tertiary PPL customers
can also claim in this period if they intend taking over primary care
within 12 months for a PPL transfer.

Customers are encouraged to lodge an early claim. An early claim is used
to assess the customer's eligibility and, for early PPL claims, to
confirm their employer registration.

Proof of the child's birth or entrustment to care must be provided for
the claim to be finalised.

For children born or adopted before 1 July 2023:

-   For Parental Leave Pay to be paid from the date of birth or entry
    into care, the customer must lodge an effective claim with their
    child’s proof of birth or entry into care details within 28 days of
    the birth or entry into care
-   The 28 day period commences the day after the date of birth or entry
    into care. If the customer lodges their claim or provides the
    required information after the 28 days, the earliest possible PPL
    period start date is the date of claim

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023:

-   Where a customer claims Parental Leave Pay proof or birth or entry
    into care must be provided within 56 days of the child’s birth or
    entry into care otherwise the claim will be made Not Effective (NEF)
-   If proof or birth or entry into care is provided, a customer can
    have their PPL days backdated up to 100 days in the past, but not
    before the child’s date of birth or entry into care

Customers can change their claim choice up until payments start.
Customers who choose to receive Newborn Supplement (NBS) with FTB Part A
can still claim PPL even after payment has been made. Any NBS and
Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) that has been paid will be a recoverable
debt.

Note: PPL will be counted as ordinary income for calculating the rate of
Income Support Payments (ISP).

Customers who receive (or are intending to claim) an ISP should
carefully consider the impact PPL will have on their ISP when making
their claim choice.

How to make an early claim

[] Customers should be encouraged to make an early claim online. This
provides customers with a streamlined experience and is the preferred
service offer. Ensure customers have 'active' online account access
before directing them to claim online.

If the customer is not capable or does not have access to suitable
technology to claim online, a Claim for Parental Leave Pay and Family
Tax Benefit (FA100) can be issued by a Service Officer.

Extra assistance is available to help remote Indigenous customers make a
claim.

A separate procedure applies for customers lodging an early claim for
Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

Early claim requirements

The customer must lodge their claim within the family assistance, PPL
and DAP allowable early claim period and provide:

-   information and evidence (if required) for the residence assessment
    for customers claiming FTB and PPL
-   their Tax File Number (TFN)
-   their bank account details
-   the expected date of birth and primary care dates

Additionally, PPL customers must provide:

-   information and evidence (if required) about how the customer meets
    the PPL work test and the PPL income test
-   their employer's Australian Business Number (ABN)

For children born or adopted before 1 July 2023, primary claimants must
also provide a nominated start date for their PPL period, if they are
entitled to one.

After early claim assessment

The customer will be sent a letter advising the outcome of their early
claim.

If assessed as eligible pending proof of birth or entry into care, they
will be sent a reminder to provide proof of the child's birth.

Tell FTB customers claiming PPL that when their PPL claim is assessed
pending proof of birth, FTB Part B will cease from the expected date of
birth or entry into care, to reduce possible risk of overpayment during
their PPL period.

Customer in crisis or experiencing financial hardship - verbal claims

For a family deemed unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim,
when helping eligible remote Indigenous customers or when helping
customers in crisis or financial hardship it is reasonable for
additional assistance to be provided. Service Officers and the Smart
Centres Families and Child Care (FCC) Processing team work in
partnership to provide a suitable outcome. If appropriate, consider a
verbal claim, if a claim is required. For verbal claims, the customer
must agree to the privacy agreement before starting the claim. For these
claims, the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) can only be submitted if the
customer meets the claim signature requirements by either accepting the
Verbal Signature Declaration or returning a signed Families Declaration
Form (FDF).

If the Verbal Signature Declaration has not been accepted, the workflow
will generate an FDF for the customer to sign and return, before the ACC
can be submitted.

Refer the activity to Families Processing for priority processing. See
Progress of claim - Families claims.

ACC should not be used for verbal claims in any other circumstances.

Other payments have their own procedures for customers who cannot claim
online.

The Resources page contains an entitlement comparison table, links to
the Services Australia website for relevant forms and publications.

Related links

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Online estimator options

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Checking the status of an early claim for family assistance and Parental
Leave Pay (PPL)

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
