-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines SIFS eligibility and rate information.

Cessation of SIFS for new customers

From 1 July 2017, SIFS is no longer payable to new customers (through
FTB instalment reconciliation, FTB lump sum claims or SIFS standalone
claims) for the 2017-18 and later financial years. Grandfathering
provisions will be in place for existing families.

Grandfathering provisions for payment of SIFS after 1 July 2017

SIFS is paid to existing eligible customers for the 2017-18 and later
financial years if they meet the following grandfathering provisions:

They were eligible for and received SIFS at a legislative rate greater
than nil in respect of 30 June 2017. In addition, the following
customers are 'in receipt of SIFS' if their SIFS payment is

-   paid to a third party on their behalf (for example, a nominee), or
-   used to offset an overpayment

A customer can become grandfathered if they were initially not entitled
to SIFS, but as a result of a reassessment, they are found to be
eligible for and received SIFS at a legislative rate greater than nil in
respect of 30 June 2017

Continuing grandfathered status

Grandfathered status for a customer will continue provided they remain
eligible for and are paid SIFS continuously from 1 July 2017. That is,
their grandfathered status is determined based on the customer's
circumstances (and SIFS eligibility) for each day in the entitlement
year. A customer loses their grandfathered status on the first day they
do not meet any of the SIFS eligibility criteria.

They will be paid SIFS up to the day they lose their eligibility.

Once a customer has lost grandfathering for SIFS, they cannot be paid
SIFS again for any future periods. The exception to this is if their
payment is reassessed and:

-   as a result of the reassessment they are found to be paid SIFS
    continuously from 30 June 2017, and
-   there are no periods where they were not eligible for SIFS

Grandfathered customers can continue to access special circumstances
extensions for claim lodgement and income confirmation from 1 July 2017,
provided they meet the special circumstances provisions.

SIFS general information

SIFS is an annual non-taxable payment of up to $300 for families with
one main income earner and single income families.

SIFS is payable from 1 July 2013 for the 2012-13 financial year
(assessment year) to 30 June 2017 for new and existing customers. For
the financial years 2017-18 onwards, SIFS is only payable to existing
customers if the grandfathering provisions are met.

Families eligible for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) do not need to claim
SIFS. Their SIFS entitlement is automatically calculated when FTB
reconciliation occurs or when their FTB lump sum claim is assessed. SIFS
is paid as the third part of FTB.

Non-FTB customers with a qualifying child in their care will need to
lodge a standalone SIFS claim after the end of each financial year to
have their SIFS entitlement assessed. Customers have until 30 June of
the lodgement year to lodge their SIFS claim and provide adequate income
details (for example, by 30 June 2018 for 2016-17 financial year).
Customers who have special circumstances that prevented them from
lodging their claim or providing adequate income details by the end of
the lodgement year may be granted an extension of time to meet the
requirement.

Eligibility criteria for SIFS

A person is eligible to receive SIFS for an assessment year if they:

had at least one qualifying child (FTB child, or a child who would be an
FTB child except that they (or someone on the child's behalf) received a
payment in their own right)

meet income requirements

-   primary earner taxable income was more than $68,000 and less than
    $150,000
-   secondary earner taxable income (members of a couple) was less than
    $18,000

meet residence requirements

meet claim requirements (non-FTB customers)

meet grandfathering provisions (from 1 July 2017 onwards)

Approved Care Organisations are not eligible for SIFS.

SIFS rate calculation

SIFS is calculated as a daily rate which applies for the period(s) in
the assessment year the customer was eligible. The maximum SIFS payment
is $302.95 but is being communicated as $300. This will not be indexed.

Shared care does not affect the SIFS rate but eligible customers must
have at least 35% care of a child (as for FTB).

-   The rate increases (from nil at $68,000) up to the maximum rate of
    $300 if primary earner income is between $80,000 and $120,000. The
    rate then reduces (to nil at $150,000)
-   Secondary earner income over $16,000 then reduces the rate (to nil
    at $18,000), only for partnered customers and only if the primary
    earner income tested rate is more than nil

Taxable income: Unlike FTB Part A and Part B, SIFS entitlement is based
on taxable income only, not adjusted taxable income (ATI).

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
SIFS Ready Reckoners.

Contents

Initial contact by customers claiming Single Income Family Supplement
(SIFS)

Online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for Single Income Family
Supplement (SIFS)

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Processing Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) claims

Cancellation, rejection and not effective codes for Single Income Family
Supplement (SIFS)

Related links

Assessing special circumstances extensions for families unable to meet
lodgement and other specific requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
