-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines how to claim payments for adopted children or who
enter care as part of surrogacy.

Making a claim

[] Customers with children in their care due to adoption or surrogacy
arrangements may claim:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) for a child born or adopted before 1 July
    2023, or
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

FTB can include Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU) if customers are not eligible for PPL.

An adoptive parent and a commissioning parent are different to foster
parents and relatives with long term care. Services Australia needs
evidence to confirm the care of the child/ren.

Adopted children

Customers can claim PPL for an adopted child if the child was initially
entrusted to the customer's care for the purpose of adoption before they
turn 16 years of age. They can also claim FTB for the child. Customers
can claim DAP for an adopted child if the child was initially entrusted
to the customer's care for the purpose of adoption before 1 July 2023
and before they turn 16 years of age.

The agency will automatically assess the customer for NBS and NBU, if
they:

-   claim PPL and FTB within 12 months of the child entering care, and
-   are not eligible for PPL

For a second or subsequent child entrusted under an adoption process,
the lower rate of NBS is payable. The higher NBS rate is payable if
multiple children are entrusted under the same process of adoption.

Adoption is a legal process and the customer needs to provide proof of
adoption from an authorised party.

To be eligible for PPL or DAP for an adopted child, an authorised party
must have placed the child in care for the purpose of the adoption. For
example, PPL and DAP are not payable if:

-   the child was initially placed with the claimant as a foster child
    or under an informal arrangement, and
-   the process of adoption commenced after this date

If a child is adopted, more than one person may be eligible and payable
for PPL/DAP or FTB (including NBS/NBU). For example, for PPL one
claimant may be the birth mother and another claimant the adoptive
parent.

Surrogacy arrangements

Customers can claim PPL and FTB for children entering care as part of a
surrogacy arrangement. Customers can claim DAP for children entering
care as part of a surrogacy arrangement before 1 July 2023.

For NBS eligibility, assess using the entrusted to care (non-parent)
criteria.

Surrogacy is an agreement between the surrogate and the commissioning
parent/s. Customers need to provide proof of the surrogacy arrangement
following the birth of the child. This includes proof that the surrogate
has relinquished care of the child.

To be eligible for PPL or DAP, the surrogacy arrangement must be agreed
before the child is conceived.

In surrogacy arrangements, more than one person may be eligible and
payable for PPL/DAP or FTB (including NBS/NBU) for the child. For
example, for:

PPL, the birth mother is able to claim PPL in the period following the
birth to enable time off work for maternal recovery

FTB (including NBS/NBU), or DAP, any claimant meeting eligibility
requirements including having care of the child may still be paid. For
example

-   one claimant may be the biological father/partner of the surrogate
    and claiming for a period before the child has left the care of the
    surrogate, and
-   another claimant might be the partner of the commissioning parent

Kinship care

Indigenous and Torres Strait Islander customers may have a child
entrusted to their care as part of their traditional law. For PPL and
DAP, these care arrangements are generally treated the same as a foster
care child.

Torres Strait Island customers who make a claim for payments because
they have a child or children entrusted to their care as part of a
kinship care arrangement must provide evidence to support the change of
care arrangement. This would include Family Court documents such as a
parentage order or adoption papers.

The Resources page contains links, forms, contact details and the
Helpdesk enquiry form, letter text, and examples.

Related links

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme options online

Initial contact for an early claim for family assistance and Parental
Leave Pay (PPL)

Initial contact by customers claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Changing claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
