Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how for customers who receive Family Tax Benefit
(FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS), and Child Care Benefit (CCB),
reconciliation of these payments occurs once the customer (and their
partner) lodges their Income Tax Return with the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO), if required. Positive or negative adjustments occur when a
customer receives a payment that is greater than or less than they were
entitled to receive. All CCB/CCR references relate to financial years
prior to 2018/2019.

Government intent

Services Australia has a legal obligation to recover an overpaid amount
under Social Security Law and Family Assistance Law. The ATO calculates
the customer's actual adjusted taxable income received for the relevant
financial year and sends this to Services Australia to work out the
amount of FTB, CCS and/or CCB the customer should have received compared
to what they did receive based on their estimated income. Services
Australia takes action to recover overpayments in most cases. The ATO
may also recover overpayments during reconciliation and lump sum claim
processing.

On this Page:

Maintenance income

Services Australia also reconciles maintenance income a customer
received in the relevant financial year with the amount of FTB they
should have received based on this maintenance income. Any negative
adjustment may be raised as an overpayment.

Debt offsetting

Debt offsetting may automatically apply during reconciliation or lump
sum claim processing if the customer has an outstanding debt.

Notification of change in circumstances

Customers have a responsibility to notify any changes in their
circumstances that may affect their entitlements or reduce their rate
within a specified period. Claim forms, notices and advices issued,
clearly state the events a person is obliged to tell Services Australia
about. There are also provisions for penalties or imprisonment if a
person misrepresents their circumstances or makes false or misleading
statements.

Contents

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) information not received for family
assistance reconciliation or lump sum claim

Returned payments and their effect on family assistance reconciliation

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Family assistance reconciliation and lump sum claim screens

Manual intervention into family assistance reconciliation

Customer enquires about reconciliation overpayment

Family assistance debts

Paid Parental Leave (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) debts

Debts arising from Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation

Child Care debts

Manual Follow-ups (MFUs) for family assistance reconciliation recovery

Related links

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts

About debts

General debt management information

Debt recovery for Centrelink

Checking, locking and unlocking Centrelink self service access

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
