[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details of employment assistance available to
customers receiving Parenting Payment (PP), Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and
Child Care Subsidy (CCS). The level of assistance available depends on
the income support payment a customer receives.

Self service terminals

All members of the Australian community are eligible to access self
service terminals. These terminals can be used free of charge by people
looking for a job.

Employment Services Providers

Services Australia is the gateway to Employment Services Providers, and
offers information to help job seekers choose the services that are
appropriate to them. Referral of job seekers to providers is subject to
the availability of services in their particular location.

Customers receiving only FTB and CCS may be eligible to register as
volunteers.

Support and assistance is provided by Employment Services Providers to
help parents return to work or increase their level of participation in
their community, and to help them to access services to improve their
work skills.

PP job seekers with mutual obligation requirements

PP job seekers with mutual obligation requirements will be registered as
Fully Eligible Participants (FEP) job seekers and have to be connected
to an appropriate provider. If the job seeker resides in a Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations designated remote area, they are
eligible for servicing by the Community Development Program (CDP)
provider.

PP job seekers with mutual obligation requirements who are fully
satisfying their requirements by undertaking suitable paid work of at
least 15 hours per week or studying full-time have no requirement to be
connected to a provider but can volunteer to do so. If the job seeker
volunteers for employment services, they should be registered as FEP and
have an initial appointment booked with a provider of their choice. If
they do not want to volunteer for employment services, they should be
registered as Job Seeker Registration Only (JSRO) job seekers.

PP customers with no mutual obligation requirements

PP customers who do not have mutual obligation requirements are eligible
to be registered as Fully Eligible Participants (FEPs) on a voluntary
basis. See Eligibility to access employment assistance through Workforce
Australia for more information on referrals.

The References page contains links to Services Australia Bilateral
Management Arrangements.

ParentsNext

From 5 May 2023, participation requirements were removed for PP
customers (single and partnered) selected for ParentsNext. Customers who
meet the eligibility criteria can choose to participate in the program.
See ParentsNext eligibility and servicing.

Community Development Program (CDP)

PP job seekers who live in a Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations designated remote area are referred to a CDP provider.

In these designated areas, CDP replaces services previously provided by:

-   Workforce Australia
-   Disability Employment Services (DES), and
-   the Indigenous Employment Program (IEP)

Related links

Employment assistance and Employment Services Providers

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through Workforce
Australia

Employment Services Providers

Inactivating job seekers registration for volunteer Employment Services
job seekers

Eligibility for Employment Services as a volunteer

Self service terminals

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Voluntary participation for the principal carer of a dependent child

ParentsNext eligibility and servicing

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
