-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines assessing a claim for Disability Support Pension
(DSP) (Blind) or Age Pension (Blind). It explains the differences and
benefits of blind pensions. A person who is assessed as permanently
blind does not need to have a Continuing Inability to Work (CITW) for
DSP.

Guidelines for assessing permanent blindness

To be eligible for a DSP (Blind) or Age Pension (Blind), the customer
must be permanently blind.

A customer is assessed as permanently blind when they meet one of the
below requirements:

-   Visual acuity on the Snellen Scale after correction by suitable
    lenses of less than 6/60 in both eyes
-   Constriction to within 10 degrees of fixation in the better eye
    irrespective of corrected visual acuity, or
-   A combination of visual defects resulting in the same degree of
    visual impairment as that occurring in the above points

The Request for Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013) requests this
information.

The Resources page contains information on the Snellen Scale .

A customer can be assessed against the eligibility criteria for
permanent blindness at any time.

Evidence required

A Request for Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013) is the best way
to provide proof of permanent blindness. However, a report which
provides the same information is acceptable.

The customer must have been assessed by an ophthalmologist. An
optometrist can complete the report but it must state it is supported by
a report from an ophthalmologist.

Taxability

DSP (Blind) is non-taxable for customers under Age Pension age.

Continuing Inability to Work not required

Customers receiving these payments are not subject to a Continuing
Inability to Work (CITW) requirement.

Benefit status display

DSP (Blind) and Age (Blind) display on the benefit status line as DSB
and AGB.

Medicare levy exemption or reduction

Customers getting Age Pension (Blind) or DSP (Blind) may be eligible for
a Medicare levy exemption or reduction.

A Medicare levy exemption or reduction letter will be sent at the end of
each financial year.

Accessible letters

DSP (Blind) or Age Pension (Blind) customers can choose to receive their
letters from Services Australia in one of the following alternative
formats:

-   read over the telephone
-   converted to a larger font
-   converted to Rich Text or Plain Text Format and sent on a computer
    disk
-   converted to Braille

The service is restricted to letters only, not forms or flyers.

Income and assets

The basic rate of DSP (Blind) and Age Pension (Blind) is not subject to
income or assets tests. Both payments are subject to compensation
provisions.

If the customer has a partner, who is not blind, who claims or gets
Centrelink payments, income and assets for both the customer and partner
must be advised. Only the DSP (Blind) or Age Pension (Blind) customer
will be exempt from income and assets tests. The partner's payment will
be assessed and reviewed using their combined income and assets.

If claiming Rent Assistance (RA) or Family Tax Benefit (FTB), DSP
(Blind) or Age Pension (Blind) customers must advise income and assets.
If not claiming FTB, RA is assessed under the income and assets tests
for blind customers.

RA that is paid with FTB are assessed normal under the income test for
family assistance payments.

Variable income

Members of a couple

DSP (Blind) and Age Pension (Blind) customers are not automatically
profiled as 2 weekly reporters when they have variable employment
income. However, their partner may be profiled. DSP (Blind) and Age
Pension (Blind) partners can choose to be manually placed onto 2 weekly
reporting. Reporting Statements can be sent in alternative letter
format. This allows the customer or their partner to report their
income.

Single customers

Single DSP (Blind) and Age Pension (Blind) customers, who have variable
employment income but do not receive RA, will not be profiled on 2
weekly reporting. These customers should not be manually placed on
reporting. Where a single AGB or DSB customer, who does not receive RA,
has been placed on reporting in error their reporting requirement should
be removed. See Reporting screens.

If the customer provides income details for RA, or for their partner,
and the employed person is:

-   under Age Pension age, they can accrue and deplete working credits
-   over Age Pension age and getting a pension (excluding PPS), they may
    be entitled to the Work Bonus. Note: the Work Bonus is not used in
    the customer's transitional rules calculation, however the Work
    Bonus will still be used in the comparison calculations and partners
    may still benefit by the reduction in total income

Compensation and direct deduction foreign pensions affect blind pensions
in the same way as they do non-blind payments. If a customer is entitled
to compensation or a foreign pension, medical reviews are set at the
time of grant.

Claiming DSP or Age (Blind)

If a customer is getting DSP or Age Pension and they are assessed as
permanently blind, they will be transferred to DSP (Blind) or Age
Pension (Blind).

Customers who want to be assessed for either DSP (Blind) or Age (Blind)
must lodge a claim.

The Resources page contains a link to SA013 form and information on
Snellen Scale ratings.

Related links

Alternative letter formats for customers with a disability or medical
condition affecting their vision

Assessing Age Pension claims

Assessing Age Pension (Blind) claims

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

The Medicare levy exemption or reduction letter

Income and Assets tests for blind customers

Qualification for Age Pension (Blind)

Rent Assistance (RA)

Age Pension (Blind) transfer provisions

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
