-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how carer Processing Service Officers code a
paper claim for Carer Payment (CP) (adult) where the care receiver is
aged 16 years of age or over. This procedure also applies for a carer
who is claiming CP due to a change of care receiver or during a
bereavement period.

CP care receiver turns 16

A carer remains qualified for CP (child) for care provided to a child
with a severe disability or severe medical condition who has been given
a qualifying rating under the Disability Care Load Assessment (child)
Determination (DCLAD) until the earlier of:

-   the care receiver turns 16 years and 3 months (or until 18 years if
    terminal), or
-   a determination is made on a claim for another income support
    payment including CP (adult)

See Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) care receivers turning
16 years of age for more details.

Claiming CP

When a claim is ready to be recorded, all supporting documentation
should have been provided. This procedure assumes the carer and care
receiver have met the qualifications for this payment, and the fully
completed and signed claim for CP has been lodged.

Note: if the carer is caring for an adult and 1 or 2 children whose
combined level of care is equivalent to 1 qualifying child, consider
multiple care options.

Medical report

If the care receiver is aged 15 years and 9 months or older, a Carer
Payment and/or Carer Allowance - Medical Report (for a person 16 years
or over) (SA332a) may be required and can be completed by a Treating
Health Professional (THP).

If the carer or the THP has ticked more than 1 answer, accept the answer
that gives the highest Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score.
Where no answer has been provided, contact the carer or THP to find out
why and give them the opportunity to answer unanswered questions in
their respective questionnaires.

Note: if the ADAT produces a qualifying score and there are unanswered
questions that have no bearing on the carer's qualification for CP or
CA, do not contact the carer or THP but document this on the carer's
record.

The signature of the care receiver (or correspondence nominee) on the
SA332(a) is authorisation for the release of medical details by the THP.
The care receiver's signature is not required for processing of the THP
form.

Request a replacement medical report by another THP there are concerns
that the care receiver's condition has improved (which would mean the
care receiver may no longer have a qualifying ADAT score). The Service
Officer would need to support this decision.

One CP paper claim for multiple care receivers

If a carer lodges 1 paper claim for CP but has listed more than 1 care
receiver, it must be determined who the carer is claiming for, for
example they have lodged 1 Claim for Carer Payment and/or Carer
Allowance (SA404) and 2 Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance - Caring
for a person 16 years or over (SA406) forms. The carer must be contacted
to discuss the following:

-   CP can be paid for only 1 care receiver
-   the circumstances of the carer and care receivers
-   the implications of the decision on bereavement provisions

The carer must be the person to decide who they claim CP for when there
is more than 1 qualifying care receiver.

Clearly document the contact with the carer on the carer's record. If
the carer cannot be contacted, send a letter to the carer requesting
contact before the claim is finalised.

Multiple CP claims received

If a carer lodges multiple claims for CP for 2 or more care receivers,
it must be determined who the carer is claiming for, for example, 2
xSA404s and 2 xSA406s are lodged. Each SA404 and/or SA406 is a deemed
claim form and must be assessed.

Contact the carer to discuss:

-   CP can be paid for only 1 care receiver
-   the circumstances of the carer and care receiver
-   the implications of the decision on bereavement provisions
-   which care receiver they want to claim CP for

The carer must be the person to decide who they claim CP for when there
is more than 1 qualifying care receiver.

Clearly document the contact with the carer on the carer's record. If
the carer cannot be contacted, send a letter to the carer requesting
contact before the claim is finalised.

If the customer fails to respond to the request to contact letter,
reject the claims.

Note: if multiple CP claims are received, all claims must be finalised,
rejection for 1 care receiver and grant for second care receiver.

Dispute between carers

If there is a dispute between 2 carers over the care being provided, see
Change of care for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)
customers.

Carer receiving DVA disability payment

If the carer is receiving a disability payment from the Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA), do not reject their claim based on income
before checking whether they may be entitled to receive Defence Force
Income Support Allowance (DFISA). The system will identify these
customers if the claim is correctly coded, including DVA Disability
payment details.

Care receiver dies before claim is finalised

If the care receiver dies before the claim is finalised, see Death of
care receiver before claim for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA) is finalised.

Carer has recently died after lodging a claim

Under some circumstances claims lodged after the death of a carer would
also be assessed. See Processing a claim after the death of a customer.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Centrelink DVA
Clearance Team (SCS, a link to Processing Service contact details and a
link to information on assessment results for Carer Payment and/or Carer
Allowance Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT) and Office Locator. It also
contains a table of when the most recent medical report causes the
cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA).

Related links

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged 16 years
or over

Coding the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)

Coding the Care Receiver Income and Assets Details (CRIA) screen

Proof of Australian citizenship

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Payment (CP)

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Initial contact after someone has died

Using the Payment Adjustment (PYAJ) screen

Creating a Q134 letter

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
