-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of a recognised disability, part
of the process of assessing a new claim for Carer Allowance (CA)
(child).

Recognised disability

For the purposes of CA (child), a child with a recognised disability is
automatically considered to be a disabled child and does not have to be
tested against the Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD)
(2020).

A recognised disability a severe disability or a chronic medical
condition with severe impact. The child must receive daily care and
attention in a residence that is the home of both the carer and care
receiver to be eligible for CA.

The Treating Health Professional (THP) will indicate on the medical
report if the child care receiver has a recognised disability and if the
condition is permanent or temporary for at least 12 months. Contact the
THP to discuss the period if they indicate the condition is less than 12
months. This is necessary because severe and chronic medical conditions
by their nature are likely to last more than 12 months. If the THP
confirms the period of condition is less than 12 months refer the case
to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk.

Severe disability

A severe disability is one, which is:

-   severe, moderate or profound, and
-   permanent or likely to be permanent

The List of Recognised Disabilities (LoRD) includes some severe
disabilities only until a young person reaches a certain age. To be
included:

-   there must be clear and widely accepted diagnostic criteria, and
-   the disability must be reasonably prevalent

Chronic medical condition

A chronic medical condition may not result in a moderate, severe or
profound disability that is permanent. Regardless of the child's age, it
may be considered a recognised disability if the chronic medical
condition:

-   requires medical treatment and supervision for a continuous period
    of at least 12 months, and
-   results in significant restriction to the young person's normal
    activities, and
-   requires significant levels of skilled personal care by the
    parent/carer

Determining if a child has a recognised disability is part of the new
claim procedure.

The Carer Allowance Medical Report (for a child under 16 years)
(SA333TDR/SA426) contains a list all of the recognised disabilities in
Questions 7 and 8. If the Treating Health Professional (THP) selects a
disability and/or medical condition from these questions, they do not
need to complete the Functional Assessment section of the Medical
Report.

Age specific recognised disability

Some medical conditions are only recognised disabilities until the care
receiver reaches a particular age. Severe Multiple Disabilities -
Seizures (SMS) is only a recognised disability if the child is under 6
months of age.

The fact that a child with this medical condition reaches the relevant
age, or is older at the time of claim, does not mean their carer is not
entitled to CA. It only means the medical condition is not a recognised
disability. The carer should complete the full child disability
assessment questions and have a full Medical Report completed. The
child's care needs will then be assessed against the Disability Care
Load Assessment (child) Determination (DCLAD) (2020) .

Coeliac Disease

The claim will need further investigation if:

-   the diagnosis is Coeliac Disease, and
-   the THP has ticked 'other inborn errors of metabolism treated by
    medically prescribed diet to prevent neurological disability and/or
    severe organ damage'

This is because Coeliac Disease on its own is not a recognised
disability.

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)

A carer of a child with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) may provide a
non-Services Australia medical report in lieu of providing a Services
Australia medical report. It may be possible to accept the non-Services
Australia medical report and assess the child care receiver as having a
recognised disability of Autism Spectrum Disorder.

Child medical details

Recording medical information on the Child Medical Details (CDMD) screen
is part of coding a new claim. When staff enter the medical condition on
the CDMD screen, the system will identify some types of recognised
disabilities. In these cases, the system should update the Recognised
Disability field with a 'Y'. If the field is blank, the system defaults
to 'Y' and presents the warning 'The Recognised Disability field for Med
Cond ### has been changed' (where ### is the medical condition coded).

Other conditions are only recognised disabilities in certain
circumstances. Because of this, the system:

-   does not identify them as recognised disabilities, and
-   does not update the Recognised Disability indicator

In these circumstances, staff must

-   determine if the condition is a recognised disability, and
-   code the Recognised Disability field with a 'Y' or ‘No’

If the indicator is not coded, the system will present a warning stating
'### may be a recognised disability' (where ### is the medical condition
coded).

Incorrect assessment of MRC Disorder as a recognised disability

The medical condition ‘Mitochondrial Respiratory Chain Disorder’ (MRC)
is not a recognised disability. Staff should not code the Recognised
Disability field with ‘Y’ on the CDMD screen for MRC.

The warning ‘W004DL – ‘MRC’ may be a Recognised Disability’ does not
need any further staff action.

The Resources page contains links to the Carer Allowance Medical Report
(for a child under 16 years) (SA333TDR and SA426) forms and contact
details for the Carer Helpdesk.

Related links

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Annual Child Disability Assistance Payment (CDAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
