-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on assessing the away from home rate
of Youth Allowance (YA) in cases where the customer has a disability and
the parental home is isolated. This criterion only applies to all
dependent YA customers.

Parental home isolated from required facilities

Where a dependent YA customer’s parental home is isolated and the
customer has a disability they may be eligible for the away from home
rate. For example, the customer may need to live away from home to:

-   board at a special school or institution for people with
    disabilities
-   access ongoing medical treatment or special facilities which would
    otherwise involve excessive travelling time, or
-   avoid aggravation to the customer's disability or other debilitating
    effects from lengthy daily travel

The customer will need to provide evidence to support their claim, for
example a letter from the special educational institution or treating
doctor to verify their individual treatment plan. These cases are
discretionary and each case should be assessed on its own merits with
consideration given to the customer’s individual circumstances.

Note: an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or payment of Youth
Disability Supplement (YDS) is not an automatic qualification for the
away from home rate of YA. Customers will still need to provide evidence
that they are required to live away from home for one of the above
reasons to satisfy this away from home criterion.

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

YDS is paid to full-time students and Australian Apprentices in receipt
of YA if the customer is under 22 years of age and has been assessed by
an ESAt as having a partial capacity to work of less than 30 hours per
week. The fact that a customer is receiving YDS does not automatically
qualify them for the away from home rate under this criteria.

Mobility Allowance (MOB)

MOB is available to persons aged 16 and older who are in the labour
market who cannot use public transport without substantial assistance
because of their disability. Those in the labour market include workers,
voluntary workers, students and job seekers.

Related links

Assessing excessive travelling time for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away
from home rate

Assessing parental home isolated for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away
from home rate

Assessing equivalent activity not available locally for Youth Allowance
(YA) at the away from home rate

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
