-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines eligibility to Services Australia administered
payments for students who study a short course.

Eligibility and payment timeframes

For the purposes of payments for students, an approved course of study
is one which is approved under the Ministerial Determination of
Education Institutions and Courses.

There is no minimum duration for a course to be approved, but the length
of the course may influence the dates for which ABSTUDY and Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) payments can be made.

For ABSTUDY and PES purposes, a 'short course' is a course where the
normal minimum duration for a full-time student to complete the course
is not more than 30 weeks. This period includes any holidays and
vacations. A student may undertake successive short courses that are
considered as standalone courses or undertake a series of articulated
short courses linked together to effectively form a longer course
leading to a higher qualification.

Qualification for student payment

Customers undertaking a short course are normally only eligible for
payment for the duration of the course. Qualification for payment
normally starts on the first day of the course and ceases on the last
day of the course.

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) payments do not normally continue
for the gap between ceasing a short course and commencing another course
(regardless of the length of the second course), unless the gap between
courses is less than 28 days, and the course is articulated with short
courses.

For examples on coding the correct start and end dates for short
courses, see the Resources page in Calculating the start day for
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY PES.

Qualification for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES payments

ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES customers may be eligible over the long vacation
break (where the gap between courses is greater than 28 days) where the
student:

-   was receiving Living Allowance for ABSTUDY PES on the basis of
    undertaking approved full-time or concessional study-load
    immediately prior to the vacation period, and
-   is intending to undertake approved full-time or concessional
    study-load study in the study period immediately following the
    vacation period

There is no entitlement to Living Allowance or ABSTUDY PES over the long
vacation break where the approved course immediately prior to the
vacation break ended earlier than 15 September and/or where the approved
course immediately after the vacation period starts after 31 March.

Supplementary entitlements

Eligibility for supplementary entitlements such as Fares Allowance (FAA)
is limited to the duration of the course.

If a Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy customer is studying in a short
course which is not an approved course under the Ministerial
Determination, they do not satisfy:

-   the full time study requirements for YA, or
-   student Activity Test for Austudy

These customers may have their course approved as either a stand-alone
activity or as part of a combination of activities in an Employment
Pathway Plan (EPP).

-   Customers aged under 22 would need to satisfy the Activity Test as a
    YA job seeker
-   Customers aged 22 and over would need to test their eligibility for
    JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

The Resources page contains a link to the National Course Approvals
sub-site.

Related links

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Effect of articulated short courses of study on continuing payment

Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Processing an ABSTUDY claim

Assessing and coding claims for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for
Austudy

Assessing the Claim for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (SY020)

Assessing Claim for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing and coding students and Australian Apprentices claims for
Youth Allowance (YA)

Effect of late starting courses of study on continuing payments for
ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
