-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the transfer to another payment from Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme.

Continuing to receive AIC Scheme payments

When a student turns 16, their family may choose to continue to receive
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments for the student
or claim ABSTUDY, Living Allowance Youth Allowance (YA) or Disability
Support Pension (DSP). Family Tax Benefit (FTB) can continue to be paid
for a student for whom AIC is payable. Where FTB is payable for a
student, it will generally be more beneficial for the family to continue
to receive AIC than for the student to claim Youth Allowance or ABSTUDY
Living Allowance. Where the student is living away from home, the
combination of AIC and FTB will usually be more beneficial than Youth
Allowance or ABSTUDY Away from Home rate and Rent Assistance.

Claiming alternative payments

If the family decides it is more beneficial for the student to claim
ABSTUDY, YA or DSP, the appropriate claim must be completed. AIC
students may also transfer to a non-Services Australia educational
assistance scheme such as the Veterans' Children Education Scheme
(VCES).

AIC customer turns 16

AIC payments will be cancelled from the student's 16th birthday if they
indicate they wish to claim another payment. A reminder letter is sent
to the applicant 28 days before the date of any term-in-advance payment
covering the term in which the student turns 16 to give them time to
make an informed decision about claiming another payment. It also gives
the applicant time to contact Services Australia to have their AIC
payments continued, before AIC is cancelled due to the student not
claiming or not being eligible for their own payment.

Reminder letter

If a student is turning 16 and AIC payments have not been cancelled
because the applicant has indicated on the AIC claim that the student
will not be claiming another payment, or they are unsure, a reminder
letter is also sent. This reminder letter is sent to the applicant 28
days before the date of any term-in-advance payment covering the term in
which the student turns 16 to advise that it is more beneficial for the
family that the student claims their own payment. If the student does
claim their own payment when they turn 16, the reminder letter gives the
applicant enough time to request cancellation of AIC from that date
without incurring an AIC debt.

Ceasing study

If an AIC student ceases studying and they wish to continue to receive
assistance, they will need to claim Youth Allowance as a job seeker or
claim YA or ABSTUDY as an Australian Apprentice.

If the AIC customer is no longer studying, but has a physical,
intellectual or psychiatric impairment, they may be qualified to receive
DSP.

Identity Confirmation

There is no identity requirement for AIC. When transferring to ABSTUDY
there are special identity requirements. One of the qualification
criteria for ABSTUDY is that the student must be of Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Island decent. The Confirmation of Identity - Verification for
Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islander people (RA10) can be used for
this purpose.

For customers transferring to YA the claimant will need to meet YA
identity requirements, i.e. proof of birth/ Arrival (Commencement of
Identity) and other approved documents (Primary/Secondary Use of
Identity in the Community). For more information see Identity
Confirmation information. If a customer has Identity Confirmation
Indicator of 'Confirmed', they should not be asked to provide further
Identity documents.

Related links

Identity Confirmation information

Claiming ABSTUDY

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

Australian Government Assistance other than Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme received by applicant or student

Alternative Identity

Lodgement of Youth Allowance (YA) (student) and Australian Apprentice
claims

Assessing Youth Allowance (YA) (trainees) claims and forms

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
