-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines assessing the away from home rate of Youth
Allowance (YA) when the parents move out of the area.

Parents move out of the area

Dependent YA customers may be eligible for the away from home rate of YA
when their parent/s move out of the area which results in excessive
travelling time for the customer, the away from home rate of YA may be
paid if moving with the parents would:

-   prevent the customer from undertaking their Australian
    Apprenticeship
-   reduce their employment prospects, or
-   interrupt the customer's continuity of study at secondary school if
    they are in year 11 or 12

If the customer remains in the parental home and the parent/s will be
moving out of the area for a temporary period (any period less than 12
months would be considered temporary) then the customer cannot qualify
for the away from home rate under this criterion. This does not mean the
customer needs to wait 12 months before they qualify for the away from
home rate if the parents are moving permanently.

Institutional requirements

The continuity of study provisions for this criterion do not apply to
tertiary students as they may study at whatever institution they choose.
However, secondary students are normally expected to study at the
closest school. Therefore, if the parents move, a high school student
would normally be expected to move as well, recommencing study at a new
school. Where this would cause major problems or disrupt the final years
of study, that is, years 11 or 12, the student may be paid to live away
from home to enable them to continue at the former school, if travelling
from the new parental home to the former school involves excessive
travel time.

Related links

Assessing excessive travelling time for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away
from home rate

Assessing parents moving frequently for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away
from home rate

Assessing parental home isolated for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away
from home rate

Assessing a customer with a disability when the parental home is
isolated from required facilities for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away
from home rate

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
