[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process accounts for assistant surgeons
and contains information about assistant surgeon fees.

Processing accounts for assistant surgeons

Service Officers should follow the on screen and PF1 help messages. If
unsure of the procedure, processing assistance should be sought from the
supervisor, Local Peer Support (LPS) or Service Support Officer
Assessing and Benefits.

Assistant surgeon fees

When a surgeon assists in an operation they bill the patients using an
'assistant surgeon' item number. This policy outlines the options for
billing patients, where a surgeon assists with a procedure.

Note: an assistant surgeon can be used during any procedure, however
assistant item numbers are eligible for Medicare benefits only where the
associated surgical item descriptors are endorsed with the word
‘Assist’. The main operating surgeon and assistant surgeon cannot be the
same health professional.

Assistant surgeons must bill the appropriate assistant surgeon item
based on the assistance provided and/or the schedule fee amount for the
operation at which assistance was provided.

Assisting one surgeon

A main operating surgeon may seek the assistance of an assistant surgeon
for a period of time during a procedure on a patient.

The main operating surgeon may include the fees for the assistant
surgeon on their own account. The payment of the assistant's fees is
then made by the main operating surgeon to the assistant surgeon, and is
not the responsibility of the patient.

Alternatively, an assistant surgeon will work as an individual surgeon
and bill the patient separately.

Assisting two surgeons

When an assistant surgeon is required to assist two surgeons performing
separate surgeries during one anaesthetic, the items for all three
providers must be assessed separately. Billing the patient for the
assistant surgeon's fee may be done by either or both surgeons. The
payment of the fees is then made directly to the assistant by either or
both surgeons.

Alternatively, the two surgeons and assistant surgeon may work as
individuals and bill the patient separately.

Note: where a patient is issued an unpaid account/invoice, the Medicare
benefit will be paid as it appears on the account/invoice.

Related links

Surgical operations assessing rules in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
