
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the accreditation requirements for practices.

The National General Practice Accreditation (NGPA) Scheme

The Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care (the
Commission) is responsible for managing a number of national
accreditation schemes, including the NGPA Scheme.

Under the NGPA Scheme, general practices accessing the PIP and/or the
WIP – Practice Stream must be assessed by an approved accrediting
agency. The approved agencies are:

-   Australian General Practice Accreditation Ltd (AGPAL)
-   Quality Practice Accreditation Pty Ltd (QPA) – formerly General
    Practice Accreditation Plus (GPA)
-   The Australian Council on Healthcare Standards (ACHS)
-   Global-Mark (GMARK)

Advisories for the NGPA Scheme

An advisory is a formal communication issued by the Commission to
accrediting agencies and general practices. Advisories provide guidance
and direction on the interpretation and/or assessment s under the NGPA
Scheme. Advisories are periodically reviewed to ensure they remain
current.

More information is available on the Commission’s website.

Eligibility and maintaining accreditation

Practices participating in the PIP and/or WIP – Practice Stream must be
accredited or registered for accreditation to be eligible.

Registered for accreditation – a practice is registered for
accreditation with an accrediting agency and working to meet the
requirements of the RACGP Standards for general practices. If registered
for accreditation, practices must achieve accreditation within 12 months
of being approved the PIP/WIP– Practice Stream to remain eligible for
payments. If the practice participates in the WIP-Practice Stream and is
PIP consenting, the 12-month period is from the approval date in PIP,
unless the approval date in WIP – Practice Stream is earlier.

Accredited - independent recognition that a practice meets the
requirements of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners
(RACGP) Standards for general practices.

Accreditation must:

-   meet the RACGP Standards for general practices
-   be provided by an approved accrediting agency approved under the
    National General Practice Accreditation Scheme

Other types of practice accreditation, such as Medical Deputising
Services (MDS) and After Hours Medical Services, are not eligible.

Practices must be accredited at the point in time date of each relevant
payment quarter to be eligible for the quarterly payment. The point in
time date is the last day of the month before the quarterly payment.

For example:

A practice was approved for the PIP on 29 July 2022 and was registered
for accreditation. The practice must achieve accreditation within 12
months (29 July 2023) to remain in the program. They did not achieve
accreditation until 10 August 2023.

The practice is not eligible for the August 2023 quarterly payments.

This is because the point in time date for the August 2023 payment
quarter is 31 July 2023. The practice was not accredited on this date.

Evidence of accreditation

An approved accrediting agency will provide a certificate to the
practice certifying it is either:

-   registered for accreditation as a general practice, or
-   accredited as a general practice

The Resources page has a link to a list of approved accrediting
agencies.

Practices must provide their accreditation certificate or registered for
accreditation certificate to Services Australia (the agency) when they
apply and when the practice relocates, amalgamates or changes ownership.

Certificates must include, but are not limited to, the following
information:

the name of an approved accreditation agency under the NGPA Scheme

accreditation type (accredited or registered for accreditation)

practice, trading or company name

physical practice location

accreditation number (the unique identifier issued by the accrediting
agency)

the set of standards used to assess the practice's accreditation status:

-   For example: RACGP Standards for general practice standards 5th
    Edition

the date the period of accreditation begins (start/certified date)

the date the period of accreditation ends (end/expiry date)

Note: the accreditation standard for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream must
be for general practice.

Practices do not need to provide evidence of ongoing accreditation
unless the agency requests it.

Accreditation data from accrediting agencies will be uploaded into PIP
and WIP – Practice Stream Online systems on a monthly basis. This upload
does not include registered for accreditation data. The registered for
accreditation data is only entered when the practice applies for the
program(s).

Practices cannot update their accreditation through Health Professional
Online Services (HPOS).

Practices must keep records of their accreditation for 6 years for
compliance purposes.

Failure to be accredited within the 12 month period

Practices that do not achieve accreditation within 12-months of approval
in the program(s), are not eligible for payments. This is regardless of
whether an extension to the registration period has been granted by the
accrediting agency. Practice payments will be automatically held and the
three quarter rule will apply.

If a practice achieves accreditation after the 12-month period:

-   they are not eligible for quarterly payments where they were not
    accredited at the payment point in time (PIT) date
-   payments will re-start from the next payment quarter where the
    practice is accredited at the payment PIT date

Accreditation requirements for additional practice branches

Additional practice branches that provide more than 3,000 Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS) services per annum must:

-   be accredited or be registered for accreditation in their own right
    to be eligible to participate in the PIP and/or the WIP – Practice
    Stream
-   achieve accreditation within 12 months after they reach 3,000 MBS
    services per annum

It is the practice’s responsibility to monitor their own MBS services
and comply with eligibility requirements. The number of MBS services for
each additional practice branch is available on each PIP payment advice.

Accreditation and practice relocation

If a practice relocates, it will need to submit an accreditation
certificate that includes the new practice address.

The practice must provide a copy of their new accreditation certificate
to the agency within 6 months of relocating. Practice payments are
placed on hold until the certificate is provided and the three quarter
rule will apply.

Program management will monitor this and take the appropriate action.

When a relocated practice provides a new accreditation certificate and
payments are on hold because of the relocation, remove the payment hold,
then add the details to the Payment Release Request spreadsheet for
program management to release any held payments.

To be eligible for withheld payments, the dates on the new accreditation
certificate must cover the point in time (PIT) date of the quarter in
which the practice relocated and the PIT dates for any withheld payment
quarters. For more information about accreditation requirements for a
practice relocation, see The National General Practice Accreditation
Scheme.

Accreditation and change of practice name

The practice name on an accreditation certificate must match either the
registered practice name, company name or trading name. If the practice
name changes where a sale of the practice has occurred, it will need a
new accreditation certificate with the new practice name.

The practice must provide a copy of their new accreditation certificate
to the agency within 6 months of the date of sale. Practice payments are
placed on hold until the certificate is provided and the three quarter
rule will apply.

Program management will monitor this and take the appropriate action.

Extensions to accreditation

Registered for accreditation

When a practice that is registered for accreditation requests an
extension to the 12-month period to achieve accreditation since joining
the program(s):

Advise the practice to send an email outlining the reason for the
request, providing any supporting documentation

-   Supporting documentation could include information from their
    accrediting agency (for example, an email confirming a cancelled
    assessment)
-   Do not advise the practice to seek additional information from their
    accrediting agency

Escalate the request to Local peer Support (LPS) via PaNDA

-   Include the email request from the practice and any supporting
    documents
-   Program management will work with the Department of Health and Aged
    Care to consider these requests on a case by case basis

Do not upload extended registered for accreditation details

Add a comment to the practice profile

Extensions to registration details that are not recorded by Program
Management should be removed and escalated to LPS via PaNDA for further
assessment.

Program management will:

-   co-ordinate the approval process with Department of Health and Aged
    Care
-   if approved, arrange for any held payments to be released
-   record approved extension to registration dates and add comments to
    the practice profile

Accredited

Practices can only get extensions to their accreditation in extenuating
circumstances. The Resources page has a link to the Commission’s
webpage. This contains information about the NGPA Scheme and the latest
advisory for extensions to accreditation.

Practices seeking extensions must contact their accrediting agency and
provide evidence of their extenuating circumstances for assessment.
Accrediting agencies must refer all requests for extensions to the
Commission. Neither Services Australia nor the accrediting agency have
the authority to grant extensions.

Practices that have not allowed sufficient time to finalise
administration of accreditation decisions will not be given an extension
to their accreditation. Accrediting agencies cannot backdate or change
the date of commencement for the new cycle to maintain continuous
accreditation.

If practices are granted an extension to their accreditation by the
Commission, program management will:

-   update the new accreditation details in PIP Online
-   determine payment eligibility to release any withheld PIP & WIP –
    Practice Stream quarterly payments

Gaps in accreditation

Gaps in accreditation:

-   are not automatically identified by the PIP and WIP - Practice
    Stream Online systems
-   are only identified by a Service Officer during usual work processes
    or program management during the monthly accreditation data upload
    process

If the point in time date(s) for relevant quarter(s) is not covered by
the new certificate, this is considered a gap in accreditation. Escalate
to LPS via PaNDA for further investigation and escalation to program
management.

Program management will place the practice payments and hold and send a
letter to the practice regarding the gap in their accreditation and
advise what they need to do if they do not agree with the decision.

Practices will get reminders to renew their accreditation from their
accrediting agency.

Changes to accreditation status

Practices are not eligible for payments if their accreditation status
changes from accredited to registered for accreditation. The Service
Officer and/or program management must place the practice payments on
hold and the three quarter rule will apply.

For example, this may occur if the practice relocates or changes
accrediting agencies.

If a practice then achieves accreditation and remains approved in PIP
and/or WIP - Practice Stream:

-   the practice is not eligible for quarterly payments where they were
    not accredited at the point in time (PIT) date of each payment
    quarter
-   payments will recommence from the next payment quarter where the
    practice is accredited at the PIT date

Escalate changes to a practice’s accreditation status to LPS via PaNDA
for further investigation. Program management will advise Service
Officers what the next steps are, such as contact with the practice or
recovery of payments.

Remove accreditation details

Service Officers can only remove an accreditation record for practice
relocation, amalgamation or an incorrect accreditation update by another
Service Officer.

If the Service Officer needs to remove the accreditation details for any
reason other than above, escalate this to LPS via PaNDA for further
investigation..

The Resources page contains additional information including FAQs,
payment holds and releases and links to external websites and letters.

Related links

Incentive Programs

Practice application for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice amalgamation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Payments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice relocation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Enquiry Management for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Forms and letters for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Link WIP - Practice Stream non-consenting practices with PIP

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
