[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about extraction of leads specialist
recognition for Medicare. Intravascular extraction of chronically
implanted permanent transvenous pacing leads (MBS item 38358) is a
procedure designed for the removal of leads, which have been implanted
for more than 6 months, and have become entrapped by fibrous tissue
attachments to the vein and heart wall.

Eligibility

The Medical Services Advisory Committee (MSAC) recommended that this
procedure be restricted to cardiologists and cardiothoracic surgeons
who:

-   have undergone specialist training in the procedure
-   participate in an audit program administered by the Cardiac Society
    of Australia and New Zealand (CSANZ)

The Lead Extraction Advisory Committee of the CSANZ assesses eligibility
for the recognition of training in this procedure and advises Services
Australia via email of eligible specialists.

The specialist's Medicare provider number details are updated to show
eligibility and the effective start date specified by the Committee.

Services Australia notifies the medical practitioner to advise that the
Committee notice has been received and their provider number details
have been updated to record eligibility and the effective date.

Access to Medicare benefits

Eligibility enables payment of Medicare benefits for the Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS) item for the extraction of pacing leads. Further
information about the item and rules can be found in the Medicare
Benefits Schedule. See the Resources page for a link to MBS Online.

Payment of Medicare benefits is also subject to the medical practitioner
being registered with the Medical Board of Australia and satisfying any
other legislative provisions that may apply at the date of service.

See also: Provider registrations in PDS

Enquiries

Assessing eligibility for recognition of training

Enquiries about assessing eligibility for the recognition of training in
intravascular extraction of chronically implanted permanent transvenous
pacing leads should be directed to the Cardiac Society of Australia and
New Zealand (CSANZ). See the Resources page for a link to the CSANZ
website.

Recording recognition of training

Enquiries about recording the recognition of training in intravascular
extraction of chronically implanted permanent transvenous pacing leads
should be directed to Medicare Provider Registration Support.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Medicare
Provider Registration and the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Online
and the Cardiac Society of Australia and New Zealand (CSANZ) website.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
