
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details about pharmacies affected by a declared
State emergency or disaster events.

Patient entitlement

If patients do not have their Medicare, Department of Veterans' Affairs
or Centrelink card, the pharmacist should call the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) general enquiries line (press option 1), for
assistance with a patient's Medicare or concessional entitlement
details.

See PBS general enquiries line in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) -
general enquiries.

Dispense using 3 day emergency supply rule without a prescription

A patient can receive a 3 day supply of medication without a
prescription. This is not a PBS arrangement and pharmacists must
dispense in accordance with state or territory emergency supply
provisions.

Dispense using the 'owing prescription' provision

Dispense using the 'owing prescription' provision.

In a case of urgency, an approved pharmacist may only supply a PBS
medication without a prescription if:

-   the PBS prescriber has advised the approved pharmacist of the
    prescription details, and
-   in the case of authority required medicines (including streamlined
    items) the required approval number has been communicated to the
    approved pharmacist

The prescriber must provide the approved pharmacist with the original
valid prescription no later than 7 days to comply with the current
legislation. See the References page for more information.

See Prescriptions and claims for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS).

Endorse prescription as 'immediate supply necessary'

The pharmacist can provide another supply if the medicine required is
within 4/20 day rule, but must endorse the prescription with the words
'immediate supply necessary' and sign the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) prescription.

Continued Dispensing of PBS Medicines in Defined Circumstances

This is an initiative that enables the provision of an eligible medicine
to a person by an approved pharmacist, under specific circumstances.
Requirements include:

-   the patient must previously have been prescribed this medicine, and
-   the pharmacist must be satisfied that it is urgently needed and it
    is not practicable to obtain a new prescription

Continued Dispensing arrangements have been expanded to support those
affected by natural disaster during the Coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19).
Expansion of the Continued Dispensing initiative is in place until 30
June 2022.

See Continued Dispensing of Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
Medicines in Defined Circumstances.

PBS and RPBS Authority lines

If prescribers contact the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and
Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS) Authority lines, and
the prescription falls under the 'too soon' rule (because of the loss of
an approved authority prescription or valid repeats), Services Australia
will exempt these patients from the 'too soon' rule and approve the
Authority. If the Authority line is unavailable, a message will indicate
the process to be followed by prescribers - to endorse the prescription
with the words 'emergency authorised by Services Australia', with a
date, time and signature.

See:

-   Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Authority approvals
-   VAPAC Authority approvals - RPBS Schedule, and
-   Handle emergencies and complaints on Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
    (PBS) Authority line

Emergency relocation of a pharmacy

Pharmacists seeking to temporarily relocate their approved pharmacy due
to damage from flood or cyclone should send an email to the Department
of Health and Aged Care, Pharmacy Approval Section quoting:

-   the name of the pharmacy
-   their current Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) approval number
-   current address of current premises, and proposed address of
    temporary premises
-   expected timeframe for return to the approved premises

There are certain conditions for pharmacies to supply PBS medicines from
alternative premises. Any enquiries of this nature should be directed to
the Department of Health and Aged Care.

The pharmacy should notify Health within 14 days of operating the
pharmacy from alternative premises.

Pharmacies can have their PBS stationery delivered to the Health
approved alternate address. They do this by editing the delivery address
details when placing orders in the PBS Stationery Online Ordering System
(PSOOS). PSOOS is accessed through Health Professional Online Services
(HPOS).

Medicine distribution arrangements

The Department of Health and Aged Care monitors Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS) supply arrangements in flood and cyclone affected areas to
ensure that patient access to essential medicines continues during a
period of emergency.

Claiming with missing prescriptions/no paperwork

If a pharmacy has lost or damaged prescriptions or claim related
paperwork due to circumstances outside of their reasonable control, they
can complete a Statutory Declaration that includes a statement about the
lost or missing paperwork. The declaration should include information
about the nature of the loss, such as natural disaster. The pharmacy
will need to retain this for a period of two years for audit and
verification purposes.

Pharmacists can download a Statutory Declaration form from the
Attorney-General's Department website or purchase one from any post
office or newsagent. Services Australia can only accept Commonwealth of
Australia Statutory Declaration forms from these sources.

See the Resources page for a link to the Attorney-General's Department
website.

Manual claiming

If claiming manually, a completed Statutory Declaration with other
supporting information can be sent to Services Australia for processing.
For example, after a claim period has closed.

For more information about processing Statutory Declarations, see
Prescriptions and claims for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Handle enquiries regarding current pharmacy

Site offices may receive calls from pharmacists who have been affected
by a declared State emergency or disaster, and are enquiring as to what
they need to do in regard to their current pharmacy, for example
relocation, temporary closure, and so on. See Emergency relocation of a
pharmacy for more information.

The Resources page contains links to contact details and the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS), Attorney-General's Department and
Department of Health and Aged Care’s websites.

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Approved suppliers - Health
Professionals

Prescriptions and claims for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Continued Dispensing of Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Medicines
in Defined Circumstances

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
