-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures to be followed in making an
assessment of a customer's entitlements when they are involved in a
business.

Modules and financial documents

Before an assessment of a business can be made by a Service Officer the
customer and partner, if applicable, will need to complete the
appropriate module/s and supply verification documents, which may
include personal and business tax returns and business financial
statements.

Business structure

The details on the module and the income tax returns will identify the
type of business structure in which the customer and/or partner are
involved. A business can be run as a sole trader, partnership, or
through a private trust or private company. In the case of a private
trust or private company, the case must be referred to the Complex
Assessment Officer (CAO) for assessment.

The customer's role in the business

A customer's role can be identified through information provided on the
claim, modules and other support documents supplied, however Service
Officers can verify this with the customer if unsure. A customer may
have roles such as owner, shareholder, director, beneficiary, or salary
earner from the business.

Other types of income received from a business structure can include
commissions, stipends, fees, honoraria, royalties and similar types of
remunerative income earned, derived or received by the customer. A
customer could have more than one role in a business and be in receipt
of an income source as well as a share of profits from the business.

Income and assets

Once the business structure and customer's roles in it have been
identified by the Service Officer, and all relevant financial documents
obtained, the Service Officer or CAO will:

-   identify the income and assets assessable from the business
    structure
-   identify the share of business income and assets owned or received
    by the customer and partner
-   code all details on the customer's and/or entity's record
-   advise the customer of the outcome of the assessment

Contents

Completing the Business details form (MOD F)

Assessing and coding the Business details for sole traders and
partnerships MOD F

Related links

Assessment of assets for Centrelink payments

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Income and expenses of a business

Assets and liabilities of a business

Assessing sole trader income

Assessing sole trader assets

Assessing partnership income

Assessing partnership assets

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Business deductions

Loans and liabilities against assets

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Common modules and forms

Pensions income and assets tests

Allowance income and assets tests

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
