-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess income for a customer operating as
a sole trader. A sole trader business is a business owned by one person.

Sole trader income assessment under social security law

For payments made under the Social Security Act 1991, the income
assessed from a sole trader business is the net income amount. This is
the gross income earned by the business less any allowable expenses
incurred in running the business.

When assessing income from a sole trader business, there are some
general points to note:

-   Salary paid to the sole trader is not assessed as employment income.
    The amount must be added back to the net profit of the business
-   Drawings are not assessable income. They are withdrawals of capital
    previously advanced to the business
-   Previous year's losses cannot be offset against the current year's
    profit
-   If the customer runs more than one business within the sole trader
    structure, the losses of one business cannot be used to offset the
    profit of another unless the customer can show that the businesses
    are necessarily related, then offsetting is allowable. That is, the
    income generated from one business could not have occurred without
    incurring a loss from the other business
-   Not all deductions are allowable under social security law. Any
    non-allowable deductions should be added back onto the net profit of
    the business
-   Profit from a sole trader business is ordinary income not employment
    income. The customer is unable to deplete their Working Credit
    balance to offset this sole trader income
    Note: if the customer is receiving a wage from their sole trader
    business, treat this as other ordinary income because salary/wage is
    added back to the net profit to obtain total assessable income. A
    sole trader cannot have an employer-employee relationship with
    themselves, as the sole trader business is not a legally separate
    entity from the owner
-   Some customers use their sole trader business as a structure to buy
    and sell shares and other investments. Not all of these sole traders
    will be considered to be carrying on a business, as this
    determination is based on the frequency and objective of the share
    trading
-   Financial assets on the business balance sheet, except for the
    principal business bank account, are considered a customer's
    personal assets and should be recorded separately, with income from
    them assessed under the deeming provisions
-   The Australian Taxation Office requires a person to lodge an income
    tax return if they carried on a business, even if there is below the
    threshold or their business is running at a loss. However, a
    customer may be assessed as being self-employed for Centrelink
    purposes, but not for taxation purposes. See Self-employed or
    employee? for more information

Evidence to support income assessment

When a customer becomes a sole trader, they must provide a projected
profit and loss statement for the first 13 weeks of their business
operation and then provide an interim profit and loss statement for that
period. Bills and receipts of payment used to develop the profit and
loss statements may be required as supporting evidence of the statement.

Note: a Business Activity Statement (BAS) cannot be used instead of a
profit and loss statement as it does not have information on expenses.

The net income from the profit and loss statement for this initial
period is to be used for the following period and not to amend the
period to which it relates.

A customer without a profit and loss statement should be issued with a
Profit and Loss Statement (SU580) in which the customer can advise past
or estimated future net profits over an appropriate period such as 3
months (13 weeks).

At 6 months, and again at 9 months and 12 months, the customer needs to
supply a new interim profit and loss statement that covers the full
period from the initial start date of the self-employment. See Steps to
assess an interim profit and loss statement. At each contact, check if
the customer needs to revise their current family assistance income
estimate and advise choices available to help reduce the chance of an
overpayment during the reconciliation process. Profit and loss
statements are to be used for assessments until the customer has lodged
an Income Tax Return that covers a full 12 months of the self-employment
income.

However, a previous year's return may not give an accurate indication of
current circumstances. If a customer advises of a significant increase
or decline in business income, a reassessment can be made at any time,
based on available business records. In this case, interim profit and
loss statements are to be obtained.

Particular care needs to be taken when Disability Support Pension (DSP)
or Carer Payment (CP) customers advise of starting self-employment as
this change in circumstance may require a review of the customer's
qualification for payment.

Hobby income

If a customer claims their activities are only a hobby, first consider
whether the customer has undertaken activities to make money, even in a
small way. If the intention is to make income then the net income and
assets should be assessed as a business.

If an activity is the main source of a customer's income then it
indicates this activity is more than a hobby.

If a customer undertakes activities only as a hobby, the gross income is
assessable. No expenses can be deducted from the income because the
customer is not carrying on a business.

If the income is not assessed as a business, the income received is to
be assessed as a lump sum for up to 52 weeks. The income should be coded
on the Other Income (OIN) screen.

Some activities will not be assessed as income because the customer is
not carrying on a business and is merely converting an asset to cash.
For example, if a customer owns a small number of cattle on land
surrounding the family home and the value of the cattle is included in
the customer's assets, money received from occasionally selling one or
more cattle is not considered income.

Artist grants - non-discretionary

Generally, artist grants paid directly to third party organisations to
allow an artist to make use of facilities such as studio space or to
attend functions are not assessed as income.

For such grants not to be considered income the artist must have no
discretion or control as to how the funds are spent. Non-discretionary
artist grants are not considered as income because artists cannot use
these funds to directly contribute to their current needs.

Artist grants - discretionary

Discretionary artist grants, including those paid direct to an artist,
such as cash payments, are assessable under the social security income
test. This is consistent with targeting assistance on the basis of a
person's current needs.

When the artist has undertaken the activities for the purpose of making
a profit, the customer is actually running a business and the grant is
included in the assessment of business income. The expenses necessarily
incurred in earning the business income will be allowed as a deduction
against the business income.

Date of event

Service Officers and Complex Assessment Officers (CAO's) must use the
correct date of event (DOV) for assessment of business income and
assets.

Income declared as employment income that is actually self-employment

If a customer has reported income as employment income that is later
determined to be self-employment, a Business Details (MOD F) must be
completed by the customer (or (MOD PT) or (MOD PC) depending on the
structure of the business).

Staff must take care to only remove the employment income in the same
activity as the self-employment income is recorded.

This will stop incorrect overpayments or arrears from generating.

The Resources page contains links to the Profit and Loss Statement
(SU580), Business Details (MOD F), Private Trust form (MOD PT), Private
Company (MOD PC) and Real Estate Details (MOD R) forms, and a link to
Office Locator for contact details for Complex Assessment Officers.

Related links

Assessing sole trader assets

Assessing and coding the Business details for sole traders and
partnerships MOD F

Assessing and coding the Real Estate Details form (MOD R)

The balance sheet

Business deductions

Business has ceased or has been sold

Carer Payment (CP) - Carer undertakes paid employment, self employment,
voluntary work, education or training activities

Commencing or returning to self-employment for Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

Common financial statements

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Income and expenses of a business

Offsetting profit and losses between businesses

Requesting information (CLK)

Raising social security debts due to self-employment or business income

Recording and correcting employment income details

Self-employed or employee?

Steps to assess an interim profit and loss statement

Share traders

Sole traders

The profit and loss statement

Treatment of lump sums

Working Credit

 

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
