-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines employer registration for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL).

Employer provided PPL

Employers must provide PPL to employees who are an Australian - based
employee with an ongoing employment relationship for at least 12 months,
before:

-   the child's expected date of birth, or
-   entry into care

Note: for Australian Public Service (APS) employees, the employment
period is covered by all APS employment.

If the employee is receiving an income support payment (ISP) at the time
of the initial PPL claim determination (including where the ISP will
cancel due to PPL payments) Services Australia will be the default PPL
paymaster. No employer determination will be made.

The automatic paymaster role transfer does not apply if an ISP is
granted to the customer’s partner. It only applies if the PPL customer
themselves are granted an ISP.

The date of effect for the transfer will be the PPL date paid to + 1 day
so that there is no overpayment against the employer.

Registration options for employers

Employers can register online with PRODA to access Paid Parental Leave
Services in Business Hub. However, if employer needs assistance with
registration, employers can contact PPLEPT for additional support.

The employer should complete the PPL registration prior to the birth of
the employee’s child. This will allow the agency to confirm existing
details with the employer when an employee claims PPL.

PPL employer requests response by email

Cyber Security and Privacy Provisions do not allow an individual’s
details to be sent or confirmed using email correspondence. The strict
guidelines prevent Services Australia from sending specific customer
information via email. If an employer indicates a preference for an
email response to their online enquiry, staff should attempt to call the
employer and if unsuccessful send the 'Please contact us' approved email
text.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
employers, Australian Business Register, myHSI, Errors and warnings,
contact information, scenarios to assist employers registering for PRODA
and a registration scenario, email templates and a description of
Business Hub access roles.

Related links

Role of the employer in Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Delivery of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Employer notifies a change of circumstances for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Authenticating an employer

Legacy Proof of Identity (POI) tiered model A to Z documents

Business Hub

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
