[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about assets and liabilities of a
business and how these items have to be adjusted and assessed in order
to determine a customer's correct entitlement.

On this Page:

Definition of assets and liabilities

Assets are things the business owns, whereas liabilities are amounts the
business owes to another party. The value of the business, known as
proprietorship, is defined by the value of all assets less the value of
all liabilities. This is shown on a balance sheet and is also known as
the net asset value of a business. The formula is:

Proprietorship = Assets - Liabilities

Payments under social security law

Customers' entitlement to income support payments under Social Security
Law are subject to means tests. In addition to the income test, for most
payments, the value of a customer's assets are to be taken into account
when calculating the rate of payment. The assets test only applies if a
customer's assets exceed the allowable limits and a lower rate is
payable than under the income test.

Most of the assets owned by a customer are treated as assessable assets
and included when calculating the rate of payment unless specifically
exempted under a provision of the Act. There is no exemption in regard
to business assets. Therefore, as a customer's interest in a business
falls within the definition of an asset, the value of this interest must
be taken into account when determining entitlement to payments. With the
introduction of the new Trusts and Companies legislation on 1 January
2002, assets also include any attributed assets from a customer's
interest in a private trust or private company.

Assessable assets are taken into account at their net market value - the
point at which a willing purchaser and a willing, but not anxious vendor
would reach agreement. The market value of an asset is only decreased by
the value of an encumbrance (mortgage) secured against it.

Assessing excess assets remaining in a business

The principle is to assess the value of a customer's interest in the
excess assets remaining in the event of the wind-up of a business. That
is, if the business operations were to cease, assets of the business
were sold and converted to cash and all liabilities repaid, the
assessable asset value of the customer's interest in a business would be
the amount left over or the amount the customer would receive.

This is accomplished by an assessment of the most recent business
balance sheet, with adjustments made to reflect the current market value
of business assets, less any allowed liabilities.

Contents

Business assets

Business liabilities

The balance sheet

The depreciation schedule

Related links

Income and expenses of a business

Changes to income and assets from a business structure

Sole traders

Partnerships

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies pre 1 January
2002

Loans

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Assessing and coding the Private Trust Mod PT

Assessing and coding the Private Company details from the MOD PC

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Valuation of real estate and other assets at new claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
