-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines if customers in receipt of Age Pension or
Disability Support Pension (DSP) will remain eligible for payment for
long term overseas absences. Centrelink International Services (CIS) are
responsible for administering these payments whilst the customer is
overseas.

Additional payment methods

If the customer plans to go overseas for more than 12 months, additional
payment methods are available. This procedure contains information to
assist a Service Officer to transfer the customer's record in order to
access these services and also to record the overseas absence.

A customer going overseas long term may either:

-   continue to receive payment into their Australian bank account
-   have their payment paid directly into an overseas bank account

See Delivery of payments to Centrelink customers outside Australia.

Portability script

Service Officer must use the Portability Script - Departures and Returns
to determine the customer's entitlement overseas. CIS will conduct the
interview, by phone, if the customer is going overseas for longer than
26 weeks and is:

-   on a restricted portability payment, or
-   studying overseas (not Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy), or
-   paid under an international agreement or paid under special
    portability rules

Not all these cases will be transferred to CIS.

Determination of payments

CIS will determine if the customer's payment is payable for long term
overseas absences or when a customer is leaving Australia to live in
another country. CIS will take into account the customer's circumstances
and the specific portability rules applicable for their payment type:

-   Age Pension
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Age Pension, Carer Payment (CP) and DSP customer records are the only
records that should be transferred to or created in Environment I.

Job Capacity Assessment for DSP customers

CIS may need to request a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) for DSP
customers to determine if the customer is eligible for indefinite
portability under the 'no future work capacity' portability provisions,
or because they are considered to be severely disabled.

Assessment Services are responsible for scheduling all JCA appointments.
The medical information obtained is used to decide whether the customer
satisfies the medical qualification for long term payment overseas. If a
customer goes overseas without having this assessment done, payment will
stop from the end of their maximum portability period (or on departure
if they are leaving Australia to live in another country).

A terminally ill customer may also need to have a form completed before
departure.

Long term overseas entitlement reviews

The system will automatically generate a Manual Follow-up (MFU) ‘CIS to
assess long term overseas entitlement’ on a customer’s record:

-   when a customer has been overseas for 12 months
-   whether the departure was advised or not

These are actioned by CIS staff, who may need to investigate the
customer’s circumstances further.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia through the
Immigration Datalink. The portability of the payment is automatically
assessed by the system, regardless of whether the customer notified the
agency or not.

Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not be
cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided
through the Immigration Datalink. If adversely affected, the customer
can provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency should consider
applying the alternative dates, if it is reasonable and results in a
beneficial outcome for the customer.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or when they have returned from a
temporary absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure prior to leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will be prompted to contact the agency. The Resources page has a link to
the Services Australia website that lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving Australia.

Change in circumstances

Customers leaving Australia are still required to notify any other
changes to their circumstances that would normally affect their payment
or concession card. Depending on the event, customers may be able to
notify the change [] online. Refer to the Change of circumstances
procedure for the relevant payment or concession card type.

The Resources page contains a link to Medicare information on the
portability of Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS) medications.

Related links

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Age Pension customer going overseas

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Assessment for Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers going overseas
under the no future work capacity provisions

Disability Support Pension (DSP) severely disabled assessments for
International Agreements

Disability Support Pension (DSP) overseas absences for terminally ill
customers

Australian pensions paid outside Australia, the proportional rate

Portability of payments paid under International Agreements

Portability of Add-ons

Working Life Residence (WLR)

Returning to Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Customers overseas on 1 July 2004

Customers overseas on 20 September 2000

Disability Medical screens

View/update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
