-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains when to reject a claim for Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (CSHC).

Rejecting claims

A customer who has lodged a claim for CSHC will not be eligible for a
CSHC if they do not meet the basic qualification or means test
provisions for CSHC or if they may have failed to comply with a customer
obligation. In these circumstances, claims must be rejected.

Note: Online claims submitted prior to 13 October 2018 and all paper
claims are not subject to Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM) rules.

CSHC and Tax File Numbers

All new CSHC claimants and their partners are required to provide a Tax
File Number (TFN), or be granted a TFN exemption. If no TFN or exemption
is provided then the CSHC claim will be rejected.

Coding rejection reasons

Some rejection reasons can be coded manually and others will be
automatic. Automatic rejections will occur when all of the customer's
information is updated on the correct screens and the new claim is
processed. This is the preferred option. This will make it easier, if
the customer should contact the agency about the decision, as all the
information is available to see without the need for the file at the
first contact.

Income estimates

Customers who have provided an estimate of income for the current
financial year, which is not an acceptable condition are to be rejected
using reason ESR-Estimate Rejected.

Customers who are rejected due to an estimate of current year income
being over the income limits cannot lodge another claim using Adjusted
Taxable Income (ATI) from a previous financial year. Customer must
provide a revised estimate for the current financial year and details of
why their estimate has changed. Service Officers are not obliged to
accept a revised estimate if reasons and amount of reduction do not seem
reasonable.

Coding relationship details

When coding a claim for CSHC the correct relationship status must be
coded for customers so that any future entitlements of quarterly
supplement will be paid at the correct rate (partnered or single).

Unfavourable Decision

When an unfavourable decision is to be made, such as a rejection, a
Decision Maker (DM) must provide the customer with an explanation of the
decision and an opportunity to provide more details or evidence relevant
to the decision. The DM must also advise the customer of their review
and appeal rights. This includes unfavourable decisions made by Service
Officers within Smart Centres.

If a DM is not speaking with a customer at the time of making a
decision, they are required to make 2 attempts to contact the customer
prior to finalising an unfavourable decision. The contact attempts can
be made at different times on the same day, where possible. A pre call
SMS should be sent before making the contact attempt, where possible.

Note: where the customer has intentionally provided inappropriate
documentation to allow their claim to be submitted under Circumstance
Change Monitor (CCM), for example a taxation notice of assessment (NOA)
has been requested but the customer has uploaded non-claim related
documents, the CSHC claim must be rejected FSD with no request for
information or documentation requests to be issued.

Related links

Assessing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Processing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Residence assessment for customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card (CSHC)

Withdrawal of claims

Making an unfavourable decision

Request to reassess a rejected claim

Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
