-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility requirements and servicing
processes for ParentsNext.

ParentsNext overview

ParentsNext is a pre-employment program for Parenting Payment (PP)
(single and partnered) customers with children under 6 years of age.
This may include grandparents or foster parents receiving PP. The
program focuses on offering individual support and referrals to services
that can help customers to plan and prepare for work or connect to the
workforce when their youngest child turns 6.

ParentsNext participants are not required to look for or take up work.
The aim is to encourage customers to think about their future work and
study related goals and to support them in achieving these goals by
connecting them with appropriate services in their local community. The
program offers individualised support that can include assistance to
access secure housing, financial advice, parenting courses, childcare,
transport, further study, training or volunteering.

Taking part in ParentsNext is voluntary. Customers selected for
ParentsNext will be invited to attend an initial appointment with
Services Australia and will be referred to a ParentsNext provider.

ParentsNext history

ParentsNext has operated since April 2016 with the first model limited
to 10 Local Government Areas (LGA).

From July 2018 ParentsNext operated nationally, in all non-remote areas
of Australia in two streams. The Intensive stream was delivered in 30
locations (67 LGAs) and the Targeted stream encompassed all other
non-remote Employment Regions nationally. There was different
eligibility criteria between the two streams resulting in customer's
being required to participate at different stages depending on their
circumstances and the age of their youngest PP child.

From July 2021, the ParentsNext program was enhanced so that eligibility
criteria is applied consistently across Australia removing the need for
the Targeted and Intensive streams. This ensures customers are selected
for ParentsNext and receive assistance based on their vulnerabilities
and not their location.

On 5 May 2023 the Government announced that ParentsNext will be replaced
by a new voluntary service to commence after 1 July 2024. Until this
time, the program will continue to operate without compulsory
participation requirements, The Department of Social Services agreed to
remove compulsory fortnightly reporting for ParentsNext participants
where the only reason they were reporting was due to being in the
program. Customers will not be required to report to Services Australia
on a fortnightly basis unless they or their partner (if partnered) are
declaring income.

ParentsNext Interim Arrangements from 1 October 2023

Customers will continue to be selected for ParentsNext using the
compulsory eligibility criteria. Customers who are selected will display
as compulsory in the system however they do not have compulsory
participation requirements.

At the Services Australia ParentsNext appointment, Service Officers are
to discuss the benefits of the ParentsNext program with the customer and
book them an appointment with a ParentsNext provider. The customer can
choose to opt out of the program after their appointment with a
provider.

Prior to referring customers to a ParentsNext provider, Service Officers
will need to code a CCE (Caring for a Child not eligible for Carer
Payment) exemption on the customers record until 30 June 2024 or until
the youngest child turns 6, whichever is earlier. This will enable
customers who display as compulsory to voluntarily participate in the
program.

Eligibility and selection

Selection for ParentsNext is automatically determined by the system
based on the information contained on the customer's record at the time
of the eligibility assessment. A customer's reason for selection into
ParentsNext is displayed on the ParentsNext Summary page within Customer
First.

Although taking part in ParentsNext is no longer compulsory, the system
will still select customers using the compulsory eligibility criteria.
The customer's participation status will continue to display as
compulsory for those selected for ParentsNext, even though participation
in the program is now voluntary.

Selection criteria

All Parenting Payment customers with children under 6 years of age who
reside in an employment service region are eligible to participate in
ParentsNext.

The system will continue to select customers if they meet all of the
following:

They have been receiving Parenting Payment (PP) (Partnered or Single)
for 6 months continuously

They are aged between 15 and under 54 years and 6 months of age, and

They have a youngest PP child aged 9 months to 5 years and 6 months

And one of the following:

-   Early School Leaver (ESL) - they are under 22 and haven't completed
    Year 12 or an equivalent qualification or higher
-   Two Years on Income Support (2IS) - they are 22 or over, haven't
    completed Year 12 or an equivalent qualification or higher and have
    been getting income support continuously for between 2 and 4 years
-   Four Years on Income Support (4IS) - they are 22 or over and have
    been getting income support continuously for more than 4 years

Note: the system calculates if the customer has been in receipt of
payment continuously for two or four years based on the Notional
continuous period of receipt of income support payments.

From 1 October 2023, Service Officers no longer need to confirm a
customer's highest level of education as part of determining eligibility
for ParentsNext. Customers who were selected as ESL or 2IS who advise
they completed Year 12 are to be referred to a ParentsNext provider as
these qualifications no longer impact eligibility from 1 October 2023.

Ongoing eligibility for ParentsNext

Once a customer has been selected for ParentsNext participant they may
remain eligible for the program even where a change of circumstances
means they no longer meet the initial selection criteria. For example,
if after selection they commence declaring income or commence study,
they will not necessarily be exited.

For further information, see ParentsNext exemptions and exits.

Exclusion criteria

A customer may meet the base selection eligibility criteria however they
won't be selected for ParentsNext if any of the following apply:

-   They live in a Community Development Program (CDP) region or Norfolk
    Island
-   They are in receipt of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   They have reported employment income or hours in the last six months
-   They are taking part in Disability Employment Services (DES)

Child 5 years and 6 months

If a customer's youngest PP child is 5 years and 6 months or older at
the time of the initial ParentsNext system eligibility assessment, they
will not be selected for ParentsNext due to their impending mutual
obligation requirements. However they can choose to volunteer.

Where a customer is selected for ParentsNext before their youngest child
turns 5 years and 6 months of age but their ParentsNext appointment with
the agency is after the child turns 5 years and 6 months the customer is
eligible to be referred.

Impact of retrospective updates on eligibility

Prior to the recent changes to ParentsNext, if customers provided
evidence of current study, completion of Year 12 or higher or they were
on leave with a job to return to, they were exited from ParentsNext once
this information was coded.

Under interim arrangements, this eligibility criteria no longer applies.
A customer should still be referred to a ParentsNext provider if:

-   They were selected as ESL or 2IS and completed Year 12 or higher
-   are currently studying or
-   on leave with a job to return to

The provider will assess their circumstances and the customer can opt
out of the program after a discussion with the provider.

In limited circumstances, if a customer does not consent to the
appointment and they would have previously met the criteria to exit the
program, code a CCE exemption. See ParentsNext exemptions and exits.

Impact of employment income on eligibility and selection

Employment income

Customers who declare employment income after they have been selected
for ParentsNext can still participate in the program. Services Officers
must discuss the customer's reporting requirements prior to referral.

If the customer declines to participate refer to ParentsNext exemptions
and exits.

Impact of address on eligibility

Transient address

Eligibility assessments for ParentsNext are based on the address that is
recorded as the customer 's current home address at the time the
assessment occurs, including the suburb where the address is recorded as
'no fixed address' due to transient accommodation.

Where a ParentsNext participant advises they have no fixed address due
to transient accommodation they should be referred to a provider so they
discuss their circumstances and work out how to best support the
customer. It will be up to the provider and the customer to determine
how best their provider appointments can be managed.

Note: this does not include where a customer advises they are homeless.
In this scenario the Service Officer must determine if it is appropriate
to grant an exemption. For further information, see ParentsNext
exemptions and exits.

Temporary address

Where a customer has a temporary address recorded, and the address is
recorded for:

-   13 weeks or more, the system will determine ParentsNext eligibility
    based on the temporary address and present ParentsNext providers
    within the online diary based on the temporary address
-   Less than 13 weeks, the system will determine ParentsNext
    eligibility based on the home address (not the temporary address)
    and will present providers within the online diary based on the home
    address

The Services Australia initial ParentsNext appointment must still be
conducted if a customer is residing in a temporary location and a
referral (where appropriate) to a ParentsNext provider for an initial
appointment made. The customer can contact the provider to discuss
whether the appointment can be conducted via phone. At the initial
provider appointment the customer can discuss circumstances and options
for receiving ParentsNext servicing whilst they reside in the temporary
location.

Impact of shared care arrangements on eligibility

Eligibility and selection assessments for ParentsNext are based only on
the children recorded in care of the Parenting Payment (PP) customer.
Where a family unit has separate care arrangements for different
children, that is, younger children are recorded as being in the care of
the PP customer's partner, those children will not be taken into account
for ParentsNext eligibility purposes. In this scenario, provided the
customer has a child under 6 in their care they are eligible to
participate in ParentsNext.

Removal of compulsory participation requirements and fortnightly reporting

From 5 May 2023, the government has removed compulsory participation
requirements for ParentsNext Participants.

This means customers selected for ParentsNext:

must not have their payment suspended if they fail:

-   to attend a ParentsNext appointment or
-   to participate in ParentsNext activities

will no longer have their payment suspended under the Targeted
Compliance Framework (TCF)

no longer need to report every 2 weeks to the agency unless:

-   they (or their partner) are declaring income, or
-   they have incurred a debt through own fault for example:
    relationship status, employment income, see Reporting requirements
    for job seekers

no longer need to undertake compulsory activities as set out by their
provider

no longer need to report to their provider on the compulsory ParentsNext
activity/activities as detailed in their Participation Plan

Customers who do not attend their ParentsNext appointment with the
agency will not have their payment suspended or cancelled.

Appointments

ParentsNext appointments with Services Australia

Parenting Payment (PP) customers who are selected for ParentsNext are
invited to undertake an appointment with the agency. Where the customer
has a phone contact number recorded, the appointment will be undertaken
by phone. If there is no contact phone number on the customer's record,
the appointment is undertaken at the customer's local service centre.

For further information, see ParentsNext appointments and processing.

Rescheduling ParentsNext appointments with Services Australia

[] Customers are able, and should be advised where appropriate, to
reschedule any appointment type via their online account. Customers are
able to reschedule via their online account if they are requesting a new
appointment within 2 days of their original appointment. If the customer
is unable to attend another appointment within 2 days, they will need to
contact the agency to have their appointment rescheduled.

There is no limit to the number of times a Service Officer or customer
can reschedule ParentsNext appointments. Appointments can only be
rescheduled up to the scheduled date and time of the original
appointment. After that point, the original appointment must be recorded
as 'did not attend' and a new appointment booked.

The system will continue to book customers into an appointment until
they are exempt or referred to a ParentsNext provider. Now that there
are no longer payment suspensions, this cycle could continue
indefinitely. Therefore if a customer does not attend 3 appointments,
Service Officers are to code an exemption. See Table 6 Step in
ParentsNext appointments and processing.

See the Resources page in View, reschedule or cancel an appointment in
the Centrelink Appointment System for an attachment containing a
complete listing of appointments and parameters for rescheduling.

ParentsNext exemptions

ParentsNext exemptions can be recorded by either the agency or a
ParentsNext provider. This will exempt the customer from having
compulsory participation requirements for the duration of the exemption.

Interim Arrangements to facilitate voluntary participation

As ParentsNext is now a voluntary service, all customers who have
participation status of compulsory and who are referred to a ParentsNext
provider must have a CCE exemption applied to their record until:

-   30 June 2024 or
-   their youngest child turns 6, whichever is the earlier

The use of the CCE exemption has been endorsed by the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) as this will enable voluntary
participation until the program is abolished.

In limited circumstances, the CCE exemption can be used on a
discretionary basis if the customer does not consent to an appointment
with a ParentsNext provider.

This exemption is also to be used for customers who do not attend 3
Services Australia ParentsNext appointments.

The granting of an exemption does not change a customer's ParentsNext
eligibility status or their reason for selection. This means a customer
will not exit from the program.

Applying exemptions due to customer circumstances

If a customer qualifies for an exemption based on their circumstances,
i.e. family domestic violence, temporary medical incapacity,) Service
Officers should apply the relevant exemption to match their
circumstances.

Service Officers will have visibility of exemptions that a ParentsNext
provider can record for a participant but they cannot make updates to
the customer's record.

After applying these exemptions, Service Officers can at their
discretion discuss the benefits of the program and book an appointment
with a ParentsNext provider.

See ParentsNext exemptions and exits.

ParentsNext providers

All customers selected for ParentsNext should be referred to a
ParentsNext provider of their choice unless the participant declines the
opportunity to participate in the program. This is to give providers the
opportunity to discuss the benefits of the program.

ParentsNext providers will:

-   conduct an initial appointment with the customer to develop and
    create a Participation Plan
-   arrange activities that are chosen by the customer that fit in with
    their family life to help prepare for work and study
-   conduct appointments with the customer at least every 3 months
-   refer the customer to other service providers
-   assess customers' eligibility for an exemption from participation

If an interpreter is needed for the provider appointment this should be
detailed in the notes field and the appointment must be booked no
earlier than 7 days in the future.

If referral options are limited, continue to refer customers to an
available provider if they raise concerns about:

-   their provider's location
-   attending an appointment in person

Tell them their provider can discuss alternate servicing arrangements.

For further information, see ParentsNext appointments and processing.

Voluntary participants

Customers who have not been selected for ParentsNext can choose to
participate voluntarily in ParentsNext if they:

-   do not live in a CDP region or Norfolk Island
-   are in receipt of Parenting Payment, and
-   have a child aged under 6 years

Where a customer is eligible for voluntary participation, the Volunteer
guided procedure will be enabled on the ParentsNext Summary page in
Customer First. If the Volunteer guided procedure is not enabled, the
customer is not eligible to voluntarily participate.

As a customer can choose to voluntarily participate before their
youngest child is 9 months of age, there may be instances where the
Customer Summary page displays the message 'Never been a ParentsNext
participant' and the ParentsNext Summary page will be blank. As the
customer has not yet been automatically assessed for ParentsNext this
display is correct.

Some customers may display as ineligible. If the Volunteer guided
procedure is enabled the customer can still choose to volunteer in the
program.

ParentsNext providers can direct register customers as a voluntary
participant. Once commenced, voluntary participants can continue in
ParentsNext for an unlimited period of time whilst they remain eligible.

A voluntary participant may be re-assessed against the selection
criteria and their status may change to compulsory. The participant will
be notified of their change in status and will be invited to attend a
ParentsNext appointment with Services Australia to discuss their ongoing
participation.

Where a voluntary participant advises they no longer wish to
participate, they can only be exited by the agency/department that
registered them as voluntary i.e. if registered by Services Australia,
only Services Australia may apply the exit or if they were direct
registered by the provider, only the provider can apply the exit.

ParentsNext notifications

Appointment notification

All customers selected for ParentsNext will be invited to attend an
appointment with Services Australia. If the customer has subscribed to
receive Centrelink letters online, they will also receive a link via
their online account to a Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations brochure that explains the ParentsNext program.

The letter advises customers that attendance in the program is
voluntary.

The Resources page has a link to the brochure.

ParentsNext exits

When a customer is no longer eligible for ParentsNext, the system will
automatically exit them from the program and update their status on the
ParentsNext Summary page.

For further information, see ParentsNext exemptions and exits.

The Resources page contains information on ParentsNext appointments, a
link to the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations ParentsNext
brochure, external website for the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations, contact details referenced in this document and
links to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk.

Related links

ParentsNext appointments and processing

ParentsNext exemptions and exits

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Eligibility for Employment Services as a volunteer

Booking appointments in the Centrelink Appointment System

Upload documents service

How to code and action a manual review

Foster care and principal carers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
