-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details about when a ParentsNext participant may
be exempt or exited from the ParentsNext program. Taking part in
ParentsNext is now voluntary, however eligibility for ParentsNext will
still be automatically determined by the system. For further
information, see ParentsNext eligibility and servicing.

Exemptions

Application of the Caring for Child not eligible for Carer Payment (CCE)
Exemption

Since 5 May 2023, the Government removed compulsory participation
requirements for ParentsNext customers. This means customers selected as
compulsory for the program can choose to participate voluntarily,
however they will continue to appear as compulsory in the system.

The system cannot exit or convert a compulsory participant to voluntary
participant. In order to bypass compulsory requirements, the Department
Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) has endorsed use of the long
term Caring for Child not eligible for Carer Payment (CCE) exemption for
customers who display as compulsory. This will enable voluntary
participation until the program is abolished after July 2024.

Service Officers can code a CCE exemption for customers who:

-   have a participation status of compulsory and are referred to a
    ParentsNext provider
-   do not attend three Services Australia ParentsNext appointments
-   do not have evidence to support a short term exemption

In limited circumstances, the CCE exemption can be used on a
discretionary basis if the customer does not consent to an appointment
with a ParentsNext provider.

Application of all other exemptions

If customer advises they cannot participate due to their current
situation, Service Officers will continue to apply a short term
exemption that aligns with their circumstances.

The majority of mutual obligation requirements exemptions are applicable
for ParentsNext participants however, there are some circumstances where
the exemption type and coding differ for ParentsNext participants.

There are two exemptions available to ParentsNext participants that are
not available to jobseekers:

-   Temporary Period of Confinement exemption
-   Bereavement exemption

ParentsNext exemptions can be recorded by either the agency or the
ParentsNext provider. This will ensure customer is not subject to the
Targeted Compliance Framework whilst participation requirements are
removed. The exemption also results in the suspension of provider
servicing which means the provider can add a voluntary participation
period.

The granting of an exemption does not change a ParentsNext participant's
eligibility status or their reason for selection. Exemptions applied by
the agency or a ParentsNext provider, will display on the ParentsNext
Summary page in Customer First, under the heading of Current Exemptions
and on the Activities and Exemption (AEX) screen in Process Direct.

See the Resources page for a list of all the available exemptions that
can be applied to ParentsNext participants by the agency and by
ParentsNext providers including the duration of each exemption type.

Family and domestic violence

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone or has already
identified family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the
current business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic
violence procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral
process.

In cases of family and domestic violence, the customer should be
referred to a Services Australia social worker. Consideration should be
given to the assessment made by the social worker as to whether an
exemption should apply and the appropriate length of the exemption. The
initial exemption must be for the maximum 16 week period. This may be
extended for one or more further periods of up to 16 weeks if
appropriate. The duration of the further periods of exemption will again
be determined by the social worker's assessment, as part of their review
of the customer's circumstances.

Action at the end of an exemption

If a customer was not yet referred to a ParentsNext provider at the time
the exemption was recorded by the agency, the system will automatically
book an appointment with the agency for a time after the exemption has
ended. Exemptions recorded by the agency will be automatically end dated
if a customer exits the program.

If an exemption is applied after the customer has already been referred
to a ParentsNext provider, it will be the responsibility of the
ParentsNext provider to re-engage with the customer at the end of the
exemption. The agency does not need to undertake any follow up at the
end of the exemption period in this instance.

Note: some exemptions may need social work intervention and
recommendation (for example, in the situation where a customer is
experiencing extreme stress, or homelessness because of a relationship
breakdown). The social worker may make an assessment and provide a
recommendation about whether an exemption should be granted. Any Service
Officer (APS 3 and above) can assess and grant Service Australia
exemptions available for ParentsNext participants. Service Officers must
not send a referral to the social work team to code a ParentsNext
exemption.

Extending an exemption

An exemption can be extended provided that the customer's circumstances
about the exemption remain current. Service Officers must confirm that
the customer is still eligible for the exemption. If not, consider
whether another exemption type is more appropriate for their
circumstances.

If an exemption is extended or a new exemption is required, then the
same process will need to be followed as coding the initial exemption
period. See relevant process for each exemption type.

ParentsNext specific exemptions and processes

ParentsNext Temporary Period of Confinement exemption

The Temporary Period of Confinement (PTC) exemption is specific to the
ParentsNext program and applies where:

-   the customer is pregnant and the birth of the child is expected
    within 6 weeks, or
-   a new child under the age of 9 months enters the customer's care

Customers are required to provide evidence of the expected date of
birth/child entered care. Evidence of the expected date of delivery can
include a letter from a doctor or registered midwife. It does not need
to be a Services Australia medical certificate.

If a customer cannot provide evidence of their circumstances a CCE
exemption can be coded to exempt them from participating. A referral
should always be offered to the customer.

ParentsNext bereavement exemption

The bereavement exemption may be granted for ParentsNext participants
for a maximum period of 16 weeks and is specific to ParentsNext. It is
relevant to the following circumstances:

Death of a partner

-   When a ParentsNext participant's partner passes away, they may be
    considered for a bereavement exemption (different to the bereavement
    mutual obligation exemption) of up to 16 weeks
-   If the Miscellaneous Update Details (NMIS) screen is coded in
    relation to the partner's death a mutual obligation Bereavement
    Period - Partner exemption will be automatically granted for a
    maximum of 14 weeks
-   The manual bereavement exemption should still be coded to make sure
    the customer is granted the maximum period of 16 weeks allowable for
    PP customers

Death of an immediate family member - When a ParentsNext participant has
an immediate family member pass away, a bereavement exemption (different
to the bereavement mutual obligation exemption) should be coded

Customer is pregnant when partner passes away

If the customer is pregnant at the time their partner passes away, they
will be exempt for a period of 16 weeks from the date of death or to the
end of the pregnancy, whichever is longer. The Bereavement Period -
Pregnant Partner exemption is automatically coded based on coding of the
partner's death on the Miscellaneous Update Details (NMIS) screen.

If the customer is still displaying as a compulsory ParentsNext
participant when the expected date of birth is reached the system will
automatically apply a ParentsNext temporary period of confinement
exemption.

Caring Responsibilities

If a ParentsNext participant has caring responsibilities, the Special
Family Circumstances exemption can be applied for up to 16 weeks.

Note: the specific caring exemption is not available for ParentsNext
participants as the maximum duration is limited to 14 weeks (applicable
to job seekers).

If the customer has long term caring responsibilities (foster carer,
non-parent carer, home schooling), see Exempting a job seeker from
mutual obligation requirements due to special circumstances.

ParentsNext provider exemptions

ParentsNext providers are also able to record exemptions for ParentsNext
participants who have already started in the program (that is, they are
linked to a provider) with the exception of the customers overseas
exemption. In this scenario, the agency will automatically apply the
exemption on advice of overseas travel.

Service Officers have visibility of exemptions applied by ParentsNext
providers but are not able to make updates.

The Resources page has a list of the ParentsNext exemptions that are
available to the agency and ParentsNext providers, plus links to
mySupport and the Level 2 Parenting Payment Helpdesk.

Automatic exits

Once a customer has been selected for ParentsNext, a change of
circumstances may result in them being automatically exited from the
program. This is because they no longer meet the eligibility criteria.

If a customer does not wish to participate in ParentsNext now that
participation is voluntary, unless they meet the exit criteria, they
will not be able to exit from the program. In these cases, an exemption
must be applied.

ParentsNext participants will be automatically exited from the program
by the system when one of the following occurs:

-   their youngest Parenting Payment (PP) child turns 6 years of age
-   their PP cancels for any reason, including cancelling for failing to
    report (FRP)
-   the customer turns 55 years of age
-   the customer passes away
-   a provider exits a ParentsNext participant due to stabilised
    earnings
-   the customer relocates to a Community Development Program (CDP) area
    or Norfolk Island
-   they start (have been recorded as attending an appointment) in
    Disability Employment Services (DES) after being selected for
    ParentsNext

Retrospective updates made to a customer's record after selection in ParentsNext

There is no requirement for Service Officers to make updates to the
customer's record in order to exit them from ParentsNext. Under interim
arrangements a customer should still be referred to a ParentsNext
provider if:

-   they were selected as an Early School Leaver or Two Years on Income
    Support and completed Year 12 or higher
-   are currently studying or
-   on leave with a job to return to

The provider will assess their circumstances and the customer can opt
out of the program after a discussion with the provider.

In limited circumstances, if a customer does not consent to the
appointment with a provider and they would have previously met the
criteria to exit the program, Service Officers can code a CCE exemption.

Stabilised earnings

Only ParentsNext providers have the delegation to exit a ParentsNext
participant where they are satisfied their employment is 'stabilised'.
Stabilised earnings are defined as an average of at least 15 hours of
paid employment per week that is expected to be ongoing. This can
include self-employment.

Note: when a provider records an exit due to stabilised earnings, a
review is automatically created on the customer's record within the
Services Australia system. This review will mature 14 days after the
exit and will determine whether the customer is declaring income. If no
income has been declared to the agency within 14 days of the exit, the
customer will be automatically re-selected for ParentsNext. In this
scenario, an alert notification is sent to their provider to re-engage
with the customer, as they are not declaring income.

New child in care after ParentsNext selection date

Once a customer has been selected for ParentsNext, if a new child enters
their care and the new child is under 9 months of age, the customer will
be eligible for a Temporary Period of confinement exemption. The
customer can volunteer to participate in the program and should be
offered a referral in this instance so that a provider can discuss the
benefits and supports available to the customer.

Manual exits cannot be recorded

All eligibility for ParentsNext is automatically assessed by the system.
When a customer no longer meets the eligibility criteria, the system
will automatically exit them from the program.

If a Service Officer believes that a customer no longer meets the
eligibility criteria for ParentsNext but they have not been
automatically exited, they must lodge an incident via mySupport.

Service Officers do not have the discretion or delegation to apply a
manual exit, and do not have the required access to do so.

If a customer is experiencing ongoing personal issues that are impacting
on their ability to participate, they can discuss their eligibility for
an exemption with their ParentsNext provider or the agency. In the case
of future study or employment, the provider will determine if this
should be included as an activity within their participation plan. For
employment, the customer's ParentsNext provider can also determine if
they may be exited due to stabilised earnings.

The Resources page has a list of the ParentsNext exemptions that are
available to the agency and ParentsNext providers, plus links to
mySupport and the Level 2 Parenting Payment Helpdesk.

Related links

ParentsNext eligibility and servicing

ParentsNext appointments and processing

Family and domestic violence

How to code and action a manual review

Assessing and coding medical evidence for temporary incapacity
exemptions

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements for serious
illness

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
