-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow when students advise and/or
confirm the course end date of their current study. Services Australia
(the agency) administered payments for students will usually stop once
the customer's course of study has ended.

Notifying change of study details

Youth Allowance (YA) (Student), Austudy, and Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) customers may [] update their details online to notify
of a change to their:

-   course end date
-   study discontinuation
-   study load, or
-   other study details

This notification option is not available to Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) customers (usually the parent/guardian is the applicant
for the student).

The record will either generate a DOC or create a Change of
Circumstances interaction if there is a change to the student's
participation status or student end date that is:

-   more than 28 days after the current recorded student end date, or
-   more than 28 days before the current recorded student end date, or
-   a date before the date of the actual online update

A Service Officer must complete the follow up action.

If an update to a student end date is made within 28 days of the current
student end date, and that date is not a date before the date of the
actual online update, this will be automatically processed.

Course end date reached

The options for the customer when their student end date is reached are:

-   start another course of study in the next available study period for
    which they may continue to receive a student payment, or
-   advise an intention to study in the next study period, or
-   apply for payment for another reason (for example, as a job seeker),
    or
-   stop receiving income support payments altogether

When a student advises that their current course has ended (or is about
to end), the Service Officer must follow the correct procedures to make
sure an appropriate outcome for the customer.

For Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) and Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES), when the course and student end date for AIC students
is the end of the study year, they remain eligible (and payments are
normally made) until 31 December. PES students who complete a full year
course (ending after 15 September) will be eligible to be paid until 31
December.

For Austudy (AUS) and Youth Allowance (Student) (YAL-STU), if the
customer is 22 years of age or older on their student end date with no
Study Details Manual Follow-ups (MFUs) recorded, they are offered a
streamlined JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claim option 28 days before their
student end date. [] This is available in the 'Confirm course end date'
task presented on their Centrelink online account home screen. See
Student to job seeker transfers.

Continuing and intending students

When Service Officers are making study updates, consideration should be
given to whether the customer can be considered a continuing/intending
student. This determination may influence whether their student payment
can continue between study periods. The rules for continuing/intending
students vary between different student payments.

14 day notification rule

If a Youth Allowance (YA) student stops full-time study, they must
notify the agency and register as a job seeker within 14 days in order
to receive backdating of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or YA (Job seeker), if
they are eligible. Failure to notify cessation of study within 14 days
will result in cancellation of YA from the student end date + 1 day.
Payment of YA (Job seeker)/JSP may only start from the date the claim
was submitted.

A debt may be generated for students who fail to notify cessation of
studies.

Effect on Student Income Bank (SIB) and Working Credits

If the customer has unused SIB credits, these credits can be transferred
to Working Credits, including where there is a gap in entitlement of up
to 12 months.

If the customer is already receiving Youth Allowance (YA) (Student) and
they start an Australian Apprenticeship, up to 1000 unused SIB credits
can be transferred to their Australian Apprentice Income Bank, where
there has been no gap in entitlement.

For more information, see Personal Income Test and Income Bank for
ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students and Australian
Apprentices.

The Resources page has links to the Payment and Service Finder and
Office Locator.

Related links

Student to job seeker transfers

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or PES

Coding new study details

Changing or correcting course of study for Youth Allowance, Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement students

Student intending to undertake a course at Honours level

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

Registering a customer as a job seeker

Working Credit

Processing end of course and intention to study reviews for Austudy and
Youth Allowance (YA)

Personal Income Test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices

Processing end of course reviews for ABSTUDY, ABSTUY Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) and PES students

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
