-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Policy

Austudy

Social Security Guide, 3.3.4.10, Approved Courses of Study for Austudy

Social Security Guide, 3.3.4.20, Austudy & Full-time Tertiary Students

Social Security Guide, 3.3.4.50, Austudy & Secondary Students

Social Security Guide, 3.3.4.80, Austudy & Impact of Previous Study

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Social Security Guide, 3.8.3.20, PES qualifying study for tertiary
students

Social Security Guide, 3.8.3.30, PES & Secondary Students

Social Security Guide, 3.8.3.70, PES & Impact of Previous Study

Youth Allowance (YA)

Social Security Guide, 3.2.7.10, Activity requirements for YA

Social Security Guide, 3.2.7.30, YA Full-time Students

Students who are enrolled in a full-time course of study, which is not yet approved

Read the following Policy Advice from the Department of Social Services
(DSS).

Youth and Student Branch - Policy Decision effective from 01/2001

Issue

Attendance of Youth Allowees as full-time students at institutions
awaiting accreditation.

Background

Private education and training providers are sometimes delayed in
receiving approval from State authorities as accredited training
providers. In some cases course approval, or approval of the
institutions themselves, may not be given until after courses have
started. Students who claim YA before accreditation of a course has been
granted or before the institution has been approved are unable to be
paid under current legislation about students. Previously, the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment would backdate payment of
AUSTUDY to the allowable start date, as long as the customer was still
undertaking the course when approval was given and it was still the
current calendar year.

Policy Decision

If it can be demonstrated that an institution is seeking accreditation
for a course, or for the institution itself, from State authorities, YA
job seeker customers may be permitted to sign an Activity Agreement,
which outlines their studies in the course or institution as the sole
term of their agreement where it is a full time course. This agreement
may be negotiated for a maximum of 6 months, with no extensions
permitted. If accreditation for the course or institution has not been
granted within this period, the customer must negotiate a new agreement
as a job seeker. Customers will not be able to access student benefits
such as the increased income free area as their record will still show
them as 'not a student'.

Legislation

Links to the Federal Register of Legislation site go to a 'Series' page.
Select the 'Latest' version.

Social Security Act 1991

Austudy

-   section 569(1), Activity test - General
-   section 569 C, Full-time students

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

-   section 1061PB(1), Undertaking qualifying study
-   section 1061PD, Full-time students

Youth Allowance (YA)

-   section 541B (1), Undertaking full-time study

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
