-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains when a child leaves a customer's care or custody.

Effect on payments and entitlements

Generally, when a child leaves a customer's care long-term or
permanently, the customer stops being entitled to family assistance,
Paid Parental Leave payments and ancillary benefits for the child. Their
entitlement to income support payments may also be affected. The gaining
carer of the child may become eligible for payments.

Customers must tell Services Australia if a child leaves their care,
even if another person is expected to claim for the child.

Mutual customers

Since 1 July 2010, a mutual customer can notify either Centrelink or
Child Support of changes to their care arrangements. The agency
receiving the information will make the care determination and the care
information will be transferred to the other agency for the assessment
of family assistance and child support entitlements. See Transfer of
information between Centrelink and Child Support.

Temporary absence from care - Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

A child may continue to be an FTB child or Regular Care Child (RCC) of a
customer during short-term (temporary) absences, generally less than 4
weeks. Temporary absence from care provisions must not be applied when
the change of care is formal, even if it is less than 28 days.

Formal care can include instances where:

-   a child is removed by a relevant state child protection service and
    placed into the care of another carer
-   the care is legally authorised by a court
-   the change of care involves a change in legal responsibility
    (whether this is removal of legal responsibility from a carer or
    where an additional carer gains legal responsibility of the child
    without the current care losing legal responsibility)

However, in some circumstances, a longer period may still be regarded as
a short-term absence that does not affect FTB eligibility. For example,
a child may be away on holiday with relatives for longer than 4 weeks.
The child may be given money for expenses by their parent who is also
still responsible for making decisions about the child's welfare while
the child is away. In these cases, the child may still be an FTB child
of the parent.

If a customer is advising of a care change, the Service Officer needs to
identify if it is a temporary change in care. If the Service Officer
needs help in determining the eligibility for temporary care, see Local
Peer Support (LPS) or a Service Support Officer (SSO) using standard
escalation protocols.

Once a temporary change in care has been clearly identified and the
temporary care decision made, DOC the customer's record with:

-   the temporary care details (including start and end date)
-   the customer has met the criteria for temporary care

Any evidence relevant to the decision should also be documented and
scanned to the record.

If a child is moving or has temporarily moved into the care of an
Approved Care Organisation (ACO), the customer may not be eligible for
temporary care provisions, even in cases where the care is less than 4
weeks. Care must be taken to determine if the temporary change in care
is formal (legal/court order) or informal (customer has delegated their
care temporarily to an ACO). For further information - See Eligibility
for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for Approved Care Organisations (ACO) - ACO
Smart Centre Processing.

The Resources page has FTB examples of legal responsibility and
temporary care provisions identifying when temporary care is not
applicable.

For child support purposes only, a one-off block of 100% care is when a
person unexpectedly gains 100% care of the child for at least 4 weeks
(it may be less depending on the circumstances).

Temporary inability to care - PPL scheme payments

Parental Leave Pay

For children born or entering care on or after 1 July 2023

A child may continue to be a PPL child of a customer during temporary
absence from care. Generally, when the birth mother, adoptive parent or
other parent is incapable of caring for the child for a period of less
than 26 weeks their Parental Leave Pay may continue to be paid.

For children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

A child may continue to be a PPL child of a customer during temporary
absence from care. Generally, when the primary claimant is incapable of
caring for the child for a period of less than 26 weeks their Parental
Leave Pay may continue to be paid.

See Paid Parental Leave scheme child leaves customer’s care/custody for
further information.

Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

DAP is not payable for children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023.
Fathers and partners will need to claim PPL.

A customer may continue to receive DAP for a child during a temporary
absence from care. The temporary inability to care for the child must be
expected to be less than 2 weeks.

Temporary absence from care - Income support payments

For income support, a temporary change of care would usually be for up
to 8 weeks. However, the child can be regarded as being in the care of
the person for 8-12 weeks if they meet specific criteria. A temporary
change of care can continue beyond 12 weeks, but advice must be sought
from the appropriate Level 3 Policy Support Helpdesk (by the Level 2
helpdesk) before making a determination. The References page has
guidelines.

Permanent change of care - FTB and PPL

-   If a child leaves a customer's care permanently or indefinitely the
    customer is no longer eligible for FTB for the child, FTB can
    continue for other FTB children in the customer's care. If the child
    dies, further payment of FTB may continue for a period of time
    depending on the circumstances
-   If the child is a Regular Care Child and there are no other FTB or
    Regular Care Children in care, the customer may lose their
    entitlement to ancillary benefits

Parental Leave Pay

For children born or entering care on or after 1 July 2023

Claimants must have care of a PPL child on a day to receive a PPL day.
As more than one carer can have care on a day, multiple claimants can
receive PPL on the same day.

A Primary carer determination will only be required where a customer
claims PPL in exceptional circumstances. The customer must be or
expected to be the primary carer before the child’s 1st
birthday/anniversary of care. However, they do not need to be primary
carer on a PPL day, just have care on that day.

PPL may continue to paid in the following situations:

-   the birth mother relinquishes care of their child as part of the
    process of adoption or a surrogacy arrangement
-   the child has been removed from the birth mother's care by a State
    or Territory child protection agency
-   the child has been unlawfully removed from the customer's care

Note: the birth mother remains eligible for PPL even if care of the
child is relinquished, as long as no more than one hour of paid work is
performed on a day they receive PPL.

For children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

The customer must be the primary carer of the child to be eligible for
Parental Leave Pay (PPL). The gaining carer may be eligible to claim PPL
as a primary claimant or secondary claimant of the child PPL may
continue to paid in the following situations:

-   the birth mother relinquishes care of their child as part of the
    process of adoption or a surrogacy arrangement
-   the child has been removed from the birth mother's care by a State
    or Territory child protection agency
-   the child has been unlawfully removed from the customer's care

There are no exceptions for DAP to be payable when a child has
permanently left the customers care. If the customer advises their child
has left their care permanently, check if there is another period they
had care of the child. If the customer is eligible to DAP for the child
for another period, advise them to change their nominated start date

See Paid Parental Leave scheme child leaves customer’s care/custody for
further information.

Permanent change of care - Income support and other payments

-   The customer may no longer eligible for ABSTUDY or ABSTUDY Schooling
    A for the child. As care updates do not 'ripple' to the ABSTUDY
    child's record, record the details on an open ABSTUDY action request
    Fast Note template for action by the ABSTUDY Smart Centre
-   For income support payments, the customer will no longer be
    considered a principal carer unless they have another qualifying
    dependent child in their care. PP customers may need to claim
    another payment such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP). If the customer
    remains eligible for Parenting Payment Single (PPS), they may need
    to meet compulsory part-time participation requirements, depending
    on the age of their youngest PP child. JSP/Youth Allowance
    (YA)/Special Benefit (SpB) customers will be subject to full-time
    mutual obligation requirements if they are no longer a principal
    carer of a dependent child.
    See Principal carer of a dependent child. If a customer's only
    dependent child dies, they may be qualified to continue to receive
    income support payments for a period of time, depending on the
    circumstances. See Death of a dependent child of a JobSeeker Payment
    (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) customer, Death of a Parenting Payment
    (PP) child or Initial contact after the death of a dependent child
-   The customer's rate of benefit/pension may reduce if the customer no
    longer qualifies for the 'with child' rate. For customers paid under
    the pension income test, the additional income free area will reduce
    as this depends on the number of dependent children in their care
-   An additional procedure applies when a customer is receiving Carer
    Allowance and/or Carer Payment for a child and the child leaves
    their care. Unless the carer provides care for other care receivers,
    they will no longer qualify for Carer Allowance (CA) and/or Carer
    Payment (CP)
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) payment will need to be
    reassessed if an AIC child has recently left care, or the care
    percentage has dropped below 50%

Shared care

If the change of care is part of a continuing pattern of care (care of
the child is shared between 2 or more people over a certain period), an
assessment of care should be completed to determine eligibility for FTB
(including ancillary benefits) and social security payments separately.
See:

-   Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family
    Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Shared care for social security payments

The shared care percentage should be recorded separately for FTB and for
social security payments. Where a customer is income support payment
(ISP) current, Social Security Care (SSC) must be coded for all single
customers to assess for the 'with child' rate.

Note: a problem (P24845) has been identified where shared care is not
being correctly applied when a child is in the care of a parent who has
transferred their FTB to their current partner (step parent). The
Resources page has further information.

Grandparent carers

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) is not payable to grandparents and non-parent
carers who are caring for a child in a child care capacity, for example
child attending child care (either child care centre/family day care or
care by a relative/friend) or staying overnight with a grandparent,
other relative or family friend. For more information, see Eligibility
for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for grandparent carers.

Out of care without consent

If someone who is not the child's parent takes a child away from a
person who has legal responsibility for the child, the child may be
considered to be an abducted child or a child out of care without
consent. If the other parent has taken the child contrary to a care
arrangement, payment for the child will be considered under the disputed
care provisions.

Payment of FTB may continue for an interim period between 4 weeks and up
to 52 weeks in some of these circumstances, and up to 8 weeks for income
support payments.

If a child stops being in a person's care without their consent on or
after 1 July 2012, discretion can be applied so that the percentage of
care can immediately be based on the actual level of care if there are
special circumstances which support that outcome. The decision would
result in the losing carer's eligibility for FTB for the child stopping.
The person who has actual care of the child may be eligible for FTB
payments for the child if they meet the normal eligibility criteria.

Note: the References page has links to the Family Assistance Guide and
further information about the length of interim periods.

PPL scheme payments

PPL scheme payments may continue to be payable to the customer if their
child is removed from their care without their consent. The customer
must be taking reasonable steps to have the child returned to their
care.

Principal carer - disputed care arrangements and abduction - Income Support Payments

In certain circumstances, a person can continue to be paid an income
support payment as a principal carer if they continue to take reasonable
steps to recover care of the child. In the event of a temporary absence
of more than 8 weeks, advice must be sought from the appropriate Level 3
Policy Support Helpdesk (by the Level 2 helpdesk) before making a
determination.

The References page has guidelines.

Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

For customers receiving CCS, a short-term absence will not affect
eligibility, if the child is still considered to be in the customer's
care and the customer is still liable for the child care fees. If a
child leaves a customer's care, the customer's CCS for that child is to
be cancelled.

Child records exist separately and need to be linked to the record of
each customer caring for the child. When details for a child are
updated, the changes will 'ripple' to all other customer records linked
to the child record. 'Shadow' child records show for customers in other
environments who share a child's details.

The Resources page has links to mySupport and FTB examples of legal
responsibility and temporary care provisions, information about a shared
care system problem (P24845) that occurs when a parent has transferred
their FTB to their current partner (step parent) and examples of
determining the principal carer of a child during a temporary absence.

Related links

Child enters customer's care/custody

Customer advises a change to their level of care of a child

Third party advises of a change in care arrangements

Change of care for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Paid Parental Leave scheme child leaves customer’s care/custody

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child out of care without consent

Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Shared care for social security payments

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for grandparent carers

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Principal carer of a dependent child

Action required when Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer no longer
entitled to child support

Inter-environment change of address (ICOA) transfer of a child record

Death of a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme child

Death of a Parenting Payment (PP) child

Death of a dependent child of a JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth
Allowance (YA) customer

Change of care for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) customers

Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customers and bereavement
assistance

Child Miscellaneous Circumstances (CHM) screen

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary
claimant for children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Claiming payments for children leaving care as part of the process of
adoption or a surrogacy arrangement

Change of circumstances for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme applicants

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
