[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a change in a customer's level of care of a
child can affect their entitlement to Centrelink payments and benefits.
It refers staff to the relevant Operational Blueprint processes for
making decisions when Services Australia is notified of a care change
for a child.

Level of care and payment entitlement

If two or more people share the care of a child, they may each be
eligible for a percentage of Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Double Orphan
Pension (DOP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) in relation to the child. The
level of actual care must be assessed to determine the customer's
entitlement to these payments. In most cases a customer is eligible for
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) if they:

-   have physical care of the child 14% or more, and
-   are liable for the child care fees

The level of actual care must also be assessed to determine the
customer's entitlement to income support payments and ancillary
benefits.

The Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) and Newborn Supplement Payment (NBS)
are not affected by the shared care percentage. Customers with at least
35% care of a child may be eligible for these payments if they receive
FTB Part A.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) cannot be shared.
Generally for PPL, the customer needs to be the primary carer of the
child. For DAP, a customer needs to have care of a child for DAP
purposes each day in the DAP period.

Income Support customers who are not assessed as a principal carer may
be eligible for a with child rate of payment.

The 'with child' rate of benefit is available to single customers in
receipt of a social security benefit. The following payments have a
higher rate of basic benefit available where a customer has a dependent
child, including shared care of a dependent child:

-   Austudy
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Shared care

A shared care assessment is appropriate where there is a pattern of care
over a certain period (for example, the child stays with the other
parent every second week, or on weekends or during school holidays). A
shared care arrangement should not be confused with a change of care. A
change of care occurs when the full caring responsibility for the child
passes to another person.

In all cases, an attempt should be made to contact the other carer to
confirm the care arrangements, even if they are not currently receiving
payments for the child.

See Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB).

Child leaves care

If a customer advises that a child has left their care for an indefinite
period (there is no ongoing pattern of shared care), their payments may
need to be stopped. Customers may remain entitled to payments for a
child if the child is temporarily absent from the customer's care or if
the child has been abducted or left the customer's care without their
consent. A separate procedure explains how to assess continuing
eligibility if a child leaves a customer's care.

In certain circumstances, PPL and DAP may still be payable when a child
leaves a customer's care.

Child enters care

If a customer advises that a child has entered their care for an
indefinite period (there is no ongoing pattern of shared care), they may
be eligible for a payment. Customers may not be eligible for a payment
if the child is only in their care temporarily. A separate procedure
explains how to assess eligibility to a payment if a Child enters
customer's care/custody.

Notifying care changes

Since 1 July 2010, a mutual customer for both family assistance payments
and Child Support can notify either agency of changes to their care
arrangements. Both agencies will use the same rules to make a care
determination. The agency receiving the information will make the care
determination and the care information will be automatically transferred
to the other agency to assess family assistance and child support
entitlements.

If the customer or other carer is also in receipt of an income support
payment, for example, Parenting Payment (PP), a separate principal carer
determination may also be required.

For children born or entering care before 1 July 2023, if the customer
is receiving PPL, a primary carer determination may be needed.

For children born or entering care on or after 1 July 2023, a Primary
carer determination will only be required where a customer claims PPL in
exceptional circumstances.

Reassessing the level of actual care

If an FTB, DOP or CA customer's level of actual care of a child has
changed as a result of a change in the pattern of care, details of the
new shared care arrangement need to be obtained. A Details of your
child's care arrangements (FA012) should be issued if the details have
not already been provided, and the customer should provide any evidence
they have of the care arrangements.

When a customer advises of a reduction in their actual care, this should
be recorded immediately to avoid a risk of overpayment. A reduction in
care may cause the cancellation of the income support payment. Where
this occurs, the customer should be advised to claim an alternate
payment and a claim contact should be recorded. An increase should only
be recorded once details are confirmed with the other person caring for
the child.

For PPL, it needs to be confirmed that the customer is still the primary
carer of the child and/or that PPL is still payable. There are certain
circumstances when these payments can continue to be payable when the
child has left their care.

Except in cases of adoption or foster care, an attempt should be made to
contact the other carer to confirm the care arrangements, even if they
are not currently receiving payments for the child.

Separate procedures cover the assessment of shared care, depending on
the payments the customer is claiming or receiving. Separate
determinations may apply under family assistance law and social security
law.

-   If making a care determination for Family Tax Benefit (and social
    security payments) see Notification and assessment of shared care
    arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   If making a care determination for social security payments only see
    Shared care for social security payments

Family assistance

Family assistance

To qualify for FTB, DOP, NBS and NBU for a child, the child must be in
the actual care of a person for at least 35% of the time. Customers who
have actual care of a child for more than 65% of the time will be
entitled to 100% of family assistance for that child.

Customers with a Regular Care Child are not eligible for FTB for the
child but may be eligible for ancillary benefits.

To qualify for CCS, the child must be in the actual care of a person for
at least 14% of the time. In shared care arrangements, this can mean
that each parent may be liable for different sessions of child care, in
the same week or different weeks. Both parents need to claim for CCS and
enter into a Complying Written Agreement (CWA) with the child care
provider.

Note: from 27 June 2022, where a CCS customer is partnered, and does not
meet care requirements, the system will automatically check if their
current partner has the child/ren coded in their care (ICC) with 14%
care or more.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

For children born or entering care on or after 1 July 2023

In normal circumstances, PPL can be paid for up to 20 weeks, to the
below, if they have care of a child:

-   birth mother
-   adoptive parent of the child
-   the other parent of the child
-   the partner of the birth mother
-   the partner of the other parent
-   the partner of the adoptive parent
-   a person claiming in exceptional circumstances
-   the partner of a person claiming in exceptional circumstances

If there is a change in the level of care PPL eligibility may be
re-assessed. This may result in the rejection or withdrawal of PPL days.

In certain circumstances when a child leaves the birth mother's care,
they may remain payable to PPL for up to 20 weeks after the birth of the
child.

For children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

PPL can be paid to the primary carer for up to 18 weeks. If there is a
change in the level of primary care PPL eligibility may be re-assessed.
This may result in the:

-   transfer of some or all of the PPL period to an eligible secondary
    claimant
-   rejection or cancellation of Flexible PPL days

For example, if a PPL customer returns to work before the end of their
PPL period:

-   the PPL period: will end, and
-   some or all of their PPL period can be transferred to another person
    taking over primary care responsibilities of the child

The new carer will need to claim and be eligible for PPL. If the child
is born on or after 1 July 2020:

-   the original carer can retain their Flexible PPL days for a later
    time that they are eligible for PPL, or
-   they can give permission for another person to claim these days

In certain circumstances when a child leaves the birth mother's care,
she may remain payable to PPL for up to 18 weeks after the birth of the
child.

Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

DAP is not payable for children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023.
Fathers and partners will need to claim PPL.

In a shared care situation percentages of care are not relevant for DAP.
The eligibility determination is based on the customer having care of a
child for DAP purposes on each day in the DAP period.

If the customer has circumstances that have arisen beyond their control
that affect their care arrangements, they should not be considered
ineligible for DAP, for example, when the DAP customer is refused access
to the child by the other carer.

Income support payments

A change in the level of actual carer of a child may mean a change to
the customer's principal carer status. This can affect eligibility for
Parenting Payment (PP), rate of payment for Youth Allowance (YA),
Austudy, Special Benefit (SpB) and JobSeeker Payment (JSP). It will also
affect their mutual obligation requirements and eligibility to
concessions.

Qualification for PP depends on having at least one eligible PP child in
care. Generally, the person with the greater level of actual care is
considered the principal carer of the child. If care is considered equal
(the difference in the shared care percentage is within 10%), a
principal carer determination is required.

Single JSP, YA and SpB customers who are considered the principal carer
of a child may be paid the 'with child' rate.

YA and Austudy customers who are partnered with dependents also receive
a 'with child' rate.

Principal carers are subject to part-time mutual obligation requirements
except where an exemption is applied. Single principal carers of a
dependent child who are granted an exemption for foster caring, home
schooling, distance education, large family or caring for a child under
a Family Law Court Order are eligible for the 'higher rate' of payment,
equivalent to the Parenting Payment Single (PPS) rate.

A 'with child' rate of JSP, YA and SpB may be paid to single customers
who share the care of a child even though they are not considered the
principal carer of the child as long as the child is a dependent or a
'regular care' child (if the child is in their care for more than 14% of
the time).

Customers claiming or receiving Carer Payment (CP) for a child under 16
years of age and who start a shared care arrangement for that child will
need to have their claim/payment assessment referred to the Level 2
Service Desk.

Carer Allowance (CA)

CA may be shared by two people who care for the same child if both
qualify for CA, and both are providing care and attention because of the
child's disability. If only one carer claims CA or only one qualifies
for CA, that person is paid the full rate of CA.

Customers who qualify for CA because of the combined Child Disability
Assessment Tool (CDAT) scores of two children can share CA if they share
the care of both children. If care of only one of the children is
shared, the customer with care of both children will receive CA at the
full rate.

Correct Date of Receipt (DOR) when applying care decisions

Using the correct DOR when applying care decisions is required to ensure
the correct information is transferred between Centrelink and Child
Support under the alignment of care data exchange.

Related links

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Change of care for Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) customers

Change of care for Carer Allowance (CA) for 2 dependent children with
disabilities

Changes to shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Child enters customer's care/custody

Child leaves customer's care/custody

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary
claimant for children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Shared care for social security payments

'With child' rate of benefit for non-principal carers with shared care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
