-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about commencing or returning to work
for customers receiving Parenting Payment Single (PPS). PPS customers
commencing or returning to full-time, part-time or casual work must
notify any changes to their employment income and hours worked within 14
days to avoid an excess payment.

Employment information

Services Australia will ask customers who report they have commenced new
employment, to provide the following details:

Employers:

-   name
-   phone number

Employee reference number

Confirmation of apprenticeship/traineeship

DOC minimum standards

DOC minimum standards require the collection and recording of enough
information about the employer (for example, contact name and address or
phone number) to allow correct assessment of income and contact with the
employer if necessary.

Services Australia may need this to verify the income details provided
or for conducting reviews resulting from Data matching with the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO).

Some customers (for example, those who work in sensitive areas like
women's refuges, etc.) may not want all employment details (for example,
business name) recorded on a DOC. This does not affect the agency's
requirement to collect sufficient information for assessment or review
purposes.

Reporting requirements

The customer will need to continue reporting their employment income to
ensure they are paid the correct rate of PPS:

-   Customers with mutual obligation requirements will generally need to
    report each fortnight via [] self-managed service channels (online
    account, Express Plus Centrelink mobile app or phone self service),
    in person or in writing (SU19) to be paid PPS
-   Customers with variable employment income will need to report 2
    weekly via self-managed service channels (online account, Express
    Plus Centrelink mobile app or phone self service) in person or in
    writing (SU19) on their Entitlement Period End Day (EPED) to be paid
    PPS. Note: it may be appropriate for the customer to be set as a
    notification reporter, if they are paid the same amount by their
    employer every week or fortnight. If they have variable income or
    are paid at a frequency other than 1 weekly or 2 weekly, they must
    report each fortnight
-   Notification reporters are subject to the normal 14 day notification
    provisions

Genuine attempts must be made to transition customers to report via self
service options before assisted reporting is completed, unless an
exception applies.

A customer with varying employment income should be directed to the
Services Australia website for more information about income and
reporting. Discuss the priority reporting line and the self-managed
service options for reporting with the customer. The customer will be
subject to 2 weekly reporting if they have variable employment income.

Self-service

[]PPS customers without participation requirements who have commenced
work, returned to work with variable employment income or have ceased
employment are able to update their employment status through their
Centrelink online account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile app, using
the Update employment status service. This service will automatically
place them onto or turn off 2 weekly reporting requirement.

Working Credits and employment income nil rate period

Customers under Age Pension age can accrue Working Credits during
fortnights of little or no income and then use their Working Credit
balance to increase the gross amount of employment income they can be
paid before PPS begins to reduce. Note: PPS customers over Age Pension
age are not eligible for the Work Bonus.

Once Working Credits are depleted, customers can be paid gross
employment income up to their income free area before their payments
start to reduce under the income test

If PPS is reduced to nil and some of the income is from employment, PPS
can remain current for up to 6 fortnights. Other benefits continue
during this employment income nil rate period, for example, PPS can be
restored within this period without the need for a claim, Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) Part B is not income tested. However, FTB Part A is income
tested for this period and customers will be given 21 days from the
commencement of the employment income nil rate period to provide an
income estimate or their FTB payment will cancel.

PPS customers will be entitled to a 12 week extension of their PCC when
their employment income reduces the payment to nil (known as the
Employment Income Nil Rate Period). During the 12 week extension period,
the customer must remain qualified for PP (with the exception of having
to have a PP child).

PPS customers may be eligible for a concession card extension of up to
26 weeks after their payment ceases to be payable due to their
employment income if they have been in continuous receipt of an income
support payment for 52 weeks when PPS is cancelled. In order to qualify
for the extended entitlement beyond 12 weeks, the customer must be
qualified for PP (including the requirement to have a PP child) on the
day immediately prior to PP being cancelled.

Cancellation of PPS

Customers whose PPS will cancel will need to provide an income estimate
for family assistance payments to include all expected income for the
financial year.

Partial capacity to work

PPS customers who have been assessed as having a partial capacity to
work due to a disability will be entitled to retain their Pension
Concession Card (PCC) for 12 months after ceasing payments due to
employment. They will also be eligible for Pharmaceutical Allowance and
Telephone Allowance.

Job Plan

PPS customers with mutual obligation requirements may need to
renegotiate their Job Plan if they start work.

Recording employment income

Service Officers will record employment income. See Recording and
correcting employment income details.

Related links

Recording and correcting employment income details

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Employment income nil rate period

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Determining the Date of Event for employment income

Paid work as an approved activity

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) income and assets tests

Reporting overview

Reporting employment income online

Shared care for social security payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

'With child' rate of benefit for non-principal carers with shared care

Working Credit

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
