-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how eligible customers for Income Management are
identified.

On this Page:

System identification

Customers may be automatically identified for Mandatory Income
Management (IM), or referred to Services Australia for IM. Services
Australia is responsible for ensuring customers meet the basic
eligibility criteria for any of the measures to which they have been
referred.

The system will identify customers who live in a declared Income
Management area who are:

eligible for Mandatory Income Management, Disengaged Youth and Long-Term
Welfare Payment Recipients measures

eligible under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient measure because
they are:

-   aged under 16 years and in receipt of a Special Benefit (SpB-USY)
-   16 years of age or over and in receipt of an independent rate of
    Youth Allowance, Disability Support Pension or ABSTUDY Living
    Allowance due to meeting the Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH)
    criteria
-   under the age of 25 and receive a Crisis Payment (CrP) within the
    last 13 weeks due to prison release

potentially eligible for Nominee Income Management (NIM)

Customers will not be identified for VWPR if they are full time students
or apprentices, or currently on voluntary IM. Note: if a customer's
voluntary IM ceases, they may be income managed under this category.

Income Management (IM) referring authorities

Customers may be referred to IM by a State or Territory Child Protection
Authority, or a Supporting People at Risk approved referring authority.
Customers referred by one of these authorities will be income managed
under Child Protection or Supporting People at Risk measures
respectively.

Vulnerable customers

Customers whose personal circumstances make them vulnerable or at risk,
will, upon being determined as suitable by a Services Australia social
worker, be placed on IM under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient
measure.

Voluntary Income Management

Customers can volunteer for IM under the voluntary IM measure. This
measure should be promoted to customers who would benefit from IM in
areas where voluntary IM is available.

Approved referring authorities and external organisations can also refer
a customer to the agency for voluntary IM, however the customer is under
no obligation to enter into a voluntary IM Agreement or attend any
appointments.

The Resources page contains a link to further information about declared
IM areas.

Contents

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Auto Income Management and suspension of payments when a customer fails
to attend Initial Assessment interview

Related links

Customer moves out of an Income Management area

Hierarchy and movement between Income Management (IM) measures -
Overview

Nominee arrangements under Income Management

Nominee Income Management

Child Protection Income Management and enhanced Income Management

Approved Authority's role in Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) Income
Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
