-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage IM and enhanced IM customers who
enter or leave prison.

Introduction

IM and enhanced IM are both tools that help customers to manage their
income support payments and prioritise spending on essential goods and
services such as food, housing, electricity, and education. It involves
setting aside a percentage of a customer’s income support payment and
100 per cent of advance and lump sum payments to their quarantined
account.

The IM program closed to new entrants on 4 September 2023, which means
that customers who are identified, or request to volunteer for welfare
quarantining, must commence on enhanced IM.

Access to funds

IM customers can access their income managed funds with a BasicsCard or
by setting up regular or one-off direct payments to stores, landlords,
or other service providers.

Enhanced IM customers have an enhanced IM account with a dedicated BSB
and account number. The enhanced IM account is linked to a SmartCard
which can be used at over one million EFTPOS terminals across Australia
and online. Customers can also set up payment transfers or BPAY payments
from their enhanced IM account.

Customer enters prison

When an IM or enhanced IM customer enters prison, and their payment is
suspended, or cancelled for more than 13 weeks, their participation in
the IM or enhanced IM program will automatically end.

If the customer has deductions, including through Centrepay or the Rent
Deduction Scheme, these deductions will cease from the suspension or
cancellation date.

Enhanced IM account

The customer’s enhanced IM account must be closed within 91 days of the
end date. If the account needs to be closed, any residual funds will be
disbursed to the customer’s nominated bank account.

Customer leaves prison

IM

If the customer’s payment is restored or re-granted to date paid to +1
(ie. there is no payment gap), the customer is then considered to have
been eligible for IM continuously and must remain on the IM program.

However, if their payment is not restored or re-granted to date paid to
+1 (ie. there is a payment gap), and they continue to meet other
eligibility criteria, the customer must commence enhanced IM as a new
customer.

Enhanced IM

Enhanced IM may be reinstated for enhanced IM customers who leave prison
and their qualifying payment is restored or re-granted, and they
continue to meet the eligibility criteria for enhanced IM.

Customers who were released from prison may be identified, or request to
volunteer for enhanced IM if they meet the eligibility criteria for the
enhanced IM program.

Exemptions and exclusions

An exemption or exclusion from IM or enhanced IM that was granted by the
agency before a customer entered prison may continue to take effect for
the customer after they leave prison.

However, the customer may be identified, or request to volunteer for
welfare quarantining at a later date.

Related links

Income Management

Enhanced Income Management (enhanced IM)

Prison admission process and claims during incarceration

Centrelink service standards and procedures for pre-release and
post-release prison customers

Effect on Income Management (IM) or enhanced Income Management (enhanced
IM) when a payment is restored or re-granted

Disbursement of funds when Income Management ends

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Coding Income Management expenses

Payment of income managed funds to Third Party Organisations (TPO)

Income Management and enhanced Income Management for Vulnerable Welfare
Payment Recipients (VWPR)

Enhanced Income Management (enhanced IM)

Ending enhanced Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
