-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The document outlines assessable foreign income. It includes all income
from another country or a specific source in another country.

Gross current rate

The gross current rate of overseas income is treated as income for
social security purposes whether the payments are made from overseas, or
through an Australian agent. No amount is deducted for any bank charges,
tax paid at source, exchange rate changes, etc. Note: deductions may be
allowed for business or real estate income.

See Assessing and coding real estate details, for more information on
how to code and assess overseas real estate.

A separate procedure explains assessment of foreign income for family
assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments. From 1 July 2008,
foreign income includes separate components for foreign income and tax
exempt foreign income.

Compensation payments received from another country must be assessed and
coded by the Compensation Recovery Team.

Arrears and lump sums

A foreign lump sum may be made for various reasons and a customer may be
granted both an ongoing pension and a lump sum at the same time.

The treatment and coding of CFP arrears are covered in Comparable
foreign payment lump sum arrears debts but it is important to first code
the ongoing pension.

Arrears of an income stream-like payment are assessed as if the income
were received for the arrears period (see Other foreign income below).

See Treatment of lump sums, for more information about the assessment of
other lump sum payments from another country.

Income from business or real estate

This may be reduced by allowable deductions for social security
purposes. Generally, expenses allowed as a deduction against gross
business income are those necessarily incurred in earning the income.
Expenses allowed as a deduction against gross rental income are those
that relate to the property.

Foreign pensions

These are generally treated as income, except some restitution payments
or blocked foreign pensions, which are exempt income. Foreign pensions
may also be treated as direct deductions instead of income or exempted
under an International Agreement. Foreign war and war widow pensions are
treated as ordinary income for all customers.

Where a customer is granted either a survivor's (widow's) pension or an
increase in their own payment following the death of a partner, the
survivor's pension income or additional surviving spouse payment is not
assessed during the bereavement period.

See Foreign pensions.

Other foreign income

Foreign savings accounts, managed investments and shares are assessed as
financial investments and therefore, subject to the deeming provisions.

Foreign superannuation-like funds are not assessed the same way as
Australian superannuation investments. These are treated as managed
investments provided the person can access the funds.

Overseas income stream products are not subject to the income stream
rules. The gross amount of income is recorded on Foreign Income/Asset
Detail (FID) and the asset value of the product is assessed as for
Australian assets that do not comply with the income stream rules. Lump
sum arrears of a foreign income stream-like product are assessed and
coded as if the payment was received throughout the arrears period. A
debt may occur because of the coding, see Categories of debt raised
under subsection 1223(1).

Foreign income should be assessed when initially advised, and then
reassessed at least yearly for annual updates for example Consumer Price
Index updates. Foreign income is usually ordinary income.

Foreign employment income

Foreign employment income is employment income paid in a foreign
currency regardless of whether the customer is in Australia or overseas.

Overseas customers with variable income

Variable reporters normally have to advise their employment income at
the end of every entitlement period but this can be unrealistic for
customers who reside outside of Australia. Unless these customers have a
partner in Australia on an income support payment, Centrelink will
assess all overseas customers as notification reporters and make use of
their 28 day notification period.

Customers who reside outside of Australia will have all income
maintained as an ongoing amount and are obliged to notify Centrelink of
any change to their circumstances within 28 days of the customer
becoming aware of this event. It would be reasonable to expect a
customer to wait a month to see if their employment income had changed
over that period but if the change becomes evident before then, they
should advise at that time.

Working Credits

All target foreign income is used when calculating the accrual of
Working Credits. The customer is unable to deplete their Working Credit
balance to offset ordinary foreign income. Working Credits can be used
to offset foreign employment income only.

Work Bonus

For customers over Age Pension age, if eligible, Work Bonus may apply
to:

-   foreign employment income, and
-   from 1 July 2019, overseas farm or business income from
    self-employment where the income has been earned from personal
    exertion

For more information, see Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age
Pension age.

The Work Bonus is applied prior to any Working Credit calculations.

Foreign assets

Any asset a customer owns, whether it is located in Australia or
overseas, is assessed at net market value (less any allowable loans or
liabilities) or as an exempt asset.

The Resources page contains an example of how the 28 day notification
rule is used to facilitate customers who have variable employment income
while residing outside Australia.

Related links

Treatment of compensation payments

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

Loans and liabilities against assets

Foreign currency and exchange rates

Foreign pension coding

Foreign pension claims

Foreign income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Assessing an overseas Income and Assets Review (AUS220)

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Income and expenses of a business

Compensation Recovery Team

Role of staff outside Compensation Teams

Exempt lump sums

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
