-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL/DAP details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document explains how customers claiming Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
or Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) need to provide their adjusted taxable
income (ATI) for a previous financial year. If they have not lodged
their tax return yet, they must provide an estimate.

Income estimates

PPL

Customers must meet the PPL income test to be eligible for PPL. All
customers claiming PPL must provide an estimate of their ATI for the
financial year before the date of claim or the date the child was born
or entered care, whichever is earlier.

For children born or adopted before 1 July 2023, the PPL income test is
based on the estimate of the customer’s income only, and does not
include their partner’s income estimate.

Secondary and tertiary claimants need to give an estimate when they
claim PPL. For example, after the primary claimant returns to work, or
after the death of the primary carer/claimant.

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023, a family income
test applies, in addition to the individual income test. If the customer
does not meet the individual income test, then the family income test
limit is applied. This applies to both single and partnered customers.
See Resources for details on when the individual or family income test
will be applied and when evidence is required.

The customer's estimate must be considered reasonable for it to be used
to assess their eligibility.

DAP

DAP is available for children born or adopted before 1 July 2023.
Customers claiming DAP must provide an estimate of their ATI for the
financial year before the date of claim or the nominated start date,
whichever is earlier. The DAP income test is based on the estimate of
the customer’s income only, and does not include their partner’s income
estimate.

The customer's estimate must be considered reasonable.

DAP claimants must meet the DAP income test to be eligible for DAP.

Determining financial year

PPL

-   For a pre-birth/adoption claim, an estimate is needed for the
    financial year before the date of the claim
-   For a post-birth/adoption claim, an estimate is needed for the
    financial year before the date the child was born or entered their
    primary care

Pre and post birth PPL claims spanning financial years

Additional income details are not needed if a customer has lodged a
pre-birth claim in a previous financial year (for example, 2021-22) and
later lodged proof of birth in the following financial year (2022-23).
The claim must be finalised using the income details provided with the
pre-birth claim.

DAP

-   For a pre-birth/adoption claim, an estimate is needed for the
    financial year before the date of the claim
-   For a post-birth/adoption claim, an estimate is needed for the
    financial year before the date of claim or the nominated start date,
    whichever is earlier

Income test and claiming DAP and PPL for the same child

Customers assessed as eligible for DAP for a child born or adopted
before 1 July 2023, who later claim PPL for the same child, do not need
to meet the income test again for the PPL claim.

Providing a reasonable estimate and evidence

Customers can provide an estimate for their claim [] online or on the
paper claim form, or by contacting by phone or in person.

If an estimate is not considered reasonable based on the financial
circumstances for the financial year and evidence available, it cannot
be used to assess eligibility.

Evidence may be required if the customer and/or partner’s adjusted
taxable income is 90% or more of the relevant financial year income
limit.

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023

Partnered Customers

Where a customer’s estimate is between the individual evidence threshold
and the individual income limit, they have the option to provide their
partner’s estimate.

If the customer:

-   provides their partner’s estimate and the combined estimate is below
    the family evidence threshold, evidence is not required. They will
    be assessed under the family income test.
-   does not provide their partner’s income estimate, evidence is
    required. They will be assessed under the individual income test

If the:

-   customer’s estimate is above the individual income limit, their
    partner’s estimate is mandatory. If their combined estimate is less
    than the family evidence threshold, evidence is not required.
-   customer and partner’s combined estimate is above the family
    evidence threshold, evidence is required

Single Customers

Evidence is only required if the customer’s estimate is above the family
evidence threshold.

See the Resources page for income evidence requirements for customers
with children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023.

Customers do not need to provide evidence if their actual adjusted
taxable income (AATI) details for the relevant financial year have been
transferred from the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) and/or Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Evidence may be requested if actual income details have not been
transferred from the ATO.

When a customer provides an estimate, a superannuation withdrawal under
the First Home Super Saver (FHSS) Scheme is not counted towards their
taxable income. The Resources page has a link to the ATO for FHSS
information.

PPL rejected due to income

-   If the customer's pre-birth claim was rejected due to income and the
    child is born or enters care in the new financial year, they may
    wish to reclaim PPL and test their eligibility against income for
    the financial year before the child's birth or entry into care
-   If a customer wants to revise their estimate for the same financial
    year, they should apply for a formal review of the decision to
    reject their PPL claim

DAP rejected due to income

If the claim was rejected due to income, the customer may request a
change to their nominated start date.

If the new nominated start date is:

-   before the date of claim and in a new financial year, the Income
    Test is assessed on the financial year based on the new nominated
    start date
-   after the date of claim and in the same financial year as the date
    of claim, the Income Test is assessed on the financial year based on
    the date of claim

Note: income assessment is based on the financial year before the date
of claim or nominated start date (whichever is earlier).

The Resources page has examples and a link to an attachment to help
determine customer requirements to meet the individual or family income
test and when evidence may be required..

Related links

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme options online

Initial contact by a parent or guardian

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

Processing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Not effective, rejection, or withdrawal of claim for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
