
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how child support paid by a customer or their
partner can reduce their Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) used for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Benefit (CCB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS),
Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP), Parental Leave Pay (PPL), Dad and Partner
Pay (DAP) and Carer Allowance (CA). All CCB/CCR references relate to
financial years prior to 2018/2019.

Child support paid to another person

The full value of the amount of child support paid by a person or their
partner to another person can be taken off their income used for FTB,
CCB, CCS, SBP, PPL, DAP and CA.

For child support to be counted as DCME:

-   the person must be the paying parent of a child support assessment,
    or other agreement with a child support liability, e.g. court
    ordered
-   the child needs to be the natural or adopted child of the person
    paying the child support
-   the person receiving the child support cannot be the customer's
    partner
-   the amount of child support to assess is the amount paid during the
    financial year, or for SBP claims during the 6 months following the
    stillbirth
-   any spousal maintenance paid for the other parent of the child is
    not included

Before 1 July 2001, only half of the amount paid in child support could
be taken off income used for family assistance.

Assessed child support amount

Child support can be paid through a formal or informal agreement and can
include:

-   cash payments
-   non-cash child support (for example, school fees, rent, mortgage
    payments, clothes, etc.)
-   capitalised maintenance (lump sum payment, transfer of property,
    etc.)

It is important only to include the expense if the child will receive
some benefit from it.

In some cases, only a proportion of the amount paid can be treated as
maintenance for the child. For example, if a customer is paying mortgage
payments but still has 50% interest in the house, 50% of the total
amount paid by the customer can be counted as DCME if it is not being
paid as maintenance for the other parent (spousal maintenance).

Customers should be advised to keep evidence of maintenance payments or
non-cash benefits not delivered via the child support agency

For information about applying DCME to the Carer Allowance income test,
see Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year
and assessable income components.

Related links

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Family assistance reconciliation and lump sum claim screens

Determining if a payment is child support/maintenance income for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB)

Non-cash maintenance income assessment for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Paid Parental Leave income test and previous financial year income
estimate

Recording or updating income estimates for previous years

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Processing Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP) claims

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
