-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to assess and code market-linked income
stream (MLI) products.

Market-linked income stream (MLI)

An MLI also known as a Term Allocated Pension (TAP). Although TAP sounds
like an account based pension (also known as an allocated income
stream), this product is not an allocated pension or an account-based
income stream. Nor is it a life expectancy income stream.

This product became available on 20 September 2004. An MLI can only be
purchased with superannuation money. An existing asset-test exempt MLI
can be fully commuted and directly transferred (rollover) to a new MLI
which complies with section 9BA. MLIs purchased on or after 20 September
2007 do not have any asset test exemption.

When a person purchases an MLI, an investment account is set up within
the superannuation fund. The investment account balance will increase as
investment earnings are added to the account and will decrease when
regular income payments are taken.

MLIs are like account-based income streams in that they are
account-based products where the value of the account balance moves up
or down in line with the value of the underlying assets.

The main difference between an MLI and an account-based income stream is
that an MLI has a specified end date. They are also like life expectancy
income streams with payments being paid for a fixed term, can receive a
50% asset-test exemption and are non-commutable.

Income stream term

The income stream is paid over a fixed term. The customer can select the
term within certain limits. The customer needs to draw a certain
proportion of the account balance (as at 1 July) as income each year.

The proportion is determined in accordance with a schedule of payment
factors specified in the Superannuation (Industry) Supervision
Regulations otherwise known as the SIS Regs. The account balance is
exhausted at the point the customer reaches life expectancy (rounded up
to the next whole year). The income stream may stop earlier if the funds
run out before the end date due to poor investment returns.

In the final year of the MLI income stream, the customer can elect to
have it expire on the actual expiry date based on the purchase date and
the term or relevant number or the closest 30 June. Depending on the
expiry date reported by the customer or their provider, the product
should be manually expired on the actual expiry date or on 30 June.

Calculation of annual payment

The annual income payment is calculated by:

-   divide the 1 July account balance by the payment factor
-   round to the nearest $10

The investor may choose an annual payment between 90-110% of the
calculated income amount.

As part of the Government response to COVID-19 (novel coronavirus) the
minimum drawdown for market-linked income streams under the
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994 have been reduced
by 50% for 2019/2020, 2020/2021, 2021/2022 and 2022/2023 financial
years. The annual amount received during these financial years can be
between 45%-110% of the calculated income amount.

Historical drawdown limits

-   1 January 2009 to 30 June 2011, the minimum drawdown limits were
    reduced by 50%. The annual amount received during these financial
    years could be between 45-110% of the calculated income amount
-   1 July 2011 to 30 June 2013, the minimum drawdown limits were
    reduced by 25%. The annual amount received from 1 July 2011 to 30
    June 2013 could be between 67.5%-110% of the calculated income
    amount
-   1 July 2013 ongoing, the original minimum drawdown limits apply.
    This means the annual payment can be between 90%-110% of the
    calculated income amount

For Centrelink purposes, the applicable minimum draw down limits will
apply when assessing the income stream, even if the customer is
receiving less than that amount. There is no change to the way the gross
annual income is calculated or assessed.

Note: the deduction amount reduces the amount of gross income assessed
under the Income Test.

Income stream schedule

The income stream provider must provide details of the income stream on
a Details of income stream product (SA330) or a similar schedule.

For an income stream from a Self-Managed Superannuation Fund (SMSF) or
Small APRA Fund (SAF), the form must be completed by the trustee of the
fund (generally the customer for an SMSF), who may get help from their
accountant or financial adviser. Some SMSFs may have a retail provider
as their administrator, for example AXA, MLC, who may complete the form.

Do not accept a schedule for a non-SMSF sourced income stream if
completed by a financial adviser, accountant, or any other person.

Assessment of a market-linked income stream

Assets: MLIs must meet all the characteristics needed under section 9BA
of the Social Security Act 1991 to be 50% asset-test exempt. 50% of the
current account balance is an assessable asset. If the income stream
does not comply with section 9BA, it is fully asset-tested.

Note: MLIs purchased on or after 20 September 2007 will not comply and
are fully asset-tested. Exception: MLIs purchased before 20 September
2007 that are commuted and rolled over into another MLI post 20
September 2007 will comply and can retain their 50% asset-test
exemption. The References page has a link to the conditions for
retention of asset-test exemption.

Income: gross annual income - deduction amount = assessed income.

Commutation

MLIs are non-commutable irrespective of if they are asset-test exempt or
asset-tested except in extremely limited circumstances. MLIs that are
not eligible to retain asset-test exemption and are assessed as
asset-tested must still comply with the requirements of section 9BA.

Jointly owned income streams

An MLI cannot be jointly owned as jointly owned income streams can only
be purchased with ordinary money (that is, non-superannuation money),
and not superannuation money. An income stream with a reversionary
beneficiary or reversionary partner is not a joint income stream.

Requests for information

Requests for information to update income streams owned by a non-current
partner are sent to the customer.

Where the customer or partner is unable or unwilling to provide
information due to FDV (Family and Domestic Violence), escalate to AISR
support. AISR support will request the information directly from the
provider.

Reversionary income stream

The person who purchased the MLI can nominate a person to receive the
income after their death, for example their spouse or partner. This
person is the reversionary beneficiary.

On reversion to a reversionary beneficiary, the income stream is
assessed from the date the reversionary is entitled to the income stream
payments. This can include lump sum arrears plus the regular ongoing
payments. It is treated as a continuation of the original income stream.
The purchase price, purchase date and relevant number remain unchanged.

If the original income stream complies with section 9BA, for Asset Test
Exempt (ATE) status on reversion, see the References page for the
retention of asset-test exemption for ATE income streams. If the income
stream loses ATE status on reversion, it is re-assessed as a
non-complying asset-tested income stream. Note: income streams will lose
ATE status when they are transferred to reversionary beneficiaries that
are not specified as reversionary partners. They must be re-coded as
non-complying asset-tested income stream.

There may be a gap between the death of the original beneficiary and the
date the reversionary beneficiary starts to receive payments. A lump sum
arrears payment is made to the reversionary beneficiary to cover the
gap. The lump sum is assessed as income from an income stream for the
period to which it relates. This may result in a debt if the person has
been receiving an income support payment.

Waiver provisions came into effect from 9 May 2018:

-   if the lump sum arrears results in a debt during the bereavement
    period for the surviving spouse, and certain conditions are met
-   only debts within the 14 week bereavement period can be waived under
    these rules

The 9 May rules are not retrospective. Any of these debts occurring
before 9 May 2018 cannot be waived using these rules

See the References page for a link to the legislation.

Online updates

[] Customers may advise of new market-linked income streams or updates
to existing market-linked income streams using their Centrelink online
account. Manual handoff will occur for all new market-linked income
streams. It needs an income stream schedule to accompany the update, and
in some cases for updates to existing market-linked income streams. If
manual processing is needed, the following is created on the customer's
record:

-   a DOC in Customer First with keyword OIAICS, and
-   a work item for staff manual action with the details provided by the
    customer

Staff can select the Work Item to process the update in Process Direct.

Income stream review

MLIs are account based and are reviewed in August and February each
year. See Income stream reviews.

The Resources page has links to the Details of Income Stream Product
form (SA330) and the Level 2 Policy Helpdesks Online Query Form.

Related links

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Adding or updating a lifetime income stream

Adding or updating pooled lifetime income stream

Adding or updating a life expectancy income stream

Adding or updating a term income stream

Assessing income streams paid from Self Managed Superannuation Funds
(SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Income stream reviews

August review of income streams

February review of income streams

Commutation of asset-test exempt (ATE) income streams

Debts arising from commutation of asset-test exempt income streams

Income and assets options online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
