-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the differences between homeowners and
non-homeowners. The principal home that a customer lives in is used to
determine whether a customer is a homeowner or not, and may be exempt
under the Assets Test.

Principal home

The principal home is generally the home in which the customer lives for
the greatest amount of time each year.

A customer is not considered a homeowner unless:

-   the customer, or their partner, owns the home in which they live, or
-   they have reasonable security of tenure, or other arrangement (for
    example, life interest, or their home is owned by a trust or company
    they have an interest in)

The principal home includes any allowable curtilage. For all new claims
from 1 January 2007, the Assets Test assessment for the principal home
and curtilage has been restricted to the customer's house and the
adjacent land on the same title document. This is known as the 'single
title rule'. Note: a single title document may have more than one parcel
of land included.

Land surrounding the home

The term curtilage means the land surrounding the home. There are now
two curtilage tests used to determine a customer's allowable house and
curtilage concession, a 'private land use test' and an 'extended land
use test'. A grandfathered savings provision for real estate will
grandfather concessions for real estate for two groups of existing
customers on payments prior to 1 January 2007. The savings provision
will cease to have effect when the customer's payment is cancelled for
any reason, or if they leave the property after 1 January 2007.

Producing income from the principal home

Part of the principal home may be assessed as an asset if a person uses
their home to produce income for example by conducting a business on the
premises, or if the home includes a self-contained living area that is
let out to a person other than a near relative. An example of a
self-contained living area or self-contained flat is an area with
private or separate sleeping, cooking and bathroom facilities. Whether a
dual occupancy home built on a customer's land is part of their
principal home, is determined by who paid the construction costs.

Customer owns more than one home

If a customer, or their partner, has more than one home:

-   their principal home is the one in which they spend the greatest
    amount of time, unless
-   they spend the same amount of time in each of them, in which case
    the most expensive home is defined as the principal home

The property which is not the principal home is assessed as an asset
even when the customer or their partner is living in the property.

If a customer or their partner spends a considerable amount of time in a
home they do not own, the home they own is the principal home.

Note: the customer, or their partner, may live in the home that they own
for 5 months a year and live the rest of the year in holiday rental
accommodation. The home they own remains their principal home.

Any real estate apart from the customer's principal home or house and
curtilage, is an assessable asset under the Assets Test. See Assessment
and sale of real estate and timeshare asset for more information.

Selling the principal home

If a customer, or their partner, sells their principal home any portion
of the proceeds intended to be used to purchase, build, rebuild, repair
or renovate a new principal home is disregarded for assets test
purposes. If the sale is:

-   before 1 January 2023, up to an initial 12 months after the sale.
    This exemption can be extended for up to another 12 months if
    certain criteria are met. If the proceeds are held as a financial
    investment, they are subject to the deemed income provisions
-   from 1 January 2023 onwards, up to an initial 24 months after the
    sale. This exemption can be extended for up to another 12 months if
    certain criteria are met. If the proceeds are held as a financial
    investment, they are subject to the proceeds intended for the new
    primary home being deemed at the lower deeming rate only

A customer meeting these conditions is considered to be a homeowner
during the exemption period.

Related links

Assessing house and curtilage

Purchasing another residence

Selling a home

Granny flat provisions

Assessing a life interest in a home

Permanent vacation of principal home

Real estate owned by a private trust or private company

Home property adjustment amount and apportionment calculations on entity
owned residences

Customer's principal residence owned by a private trust or private
company - determining home ownership

Assessing caravans, boats and park homes

Assessing and coding real estate details

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
