-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the two types of foreign income and how they are
recorded in a family's adjusted taxable income (ATI) for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS), Child Care Benefit (CCB),
Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP), Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and
Partner Pay (DAP).

Note: All CCB/CCR references relate to financial years prior to
2018/2019.

Foreign income

There are many situations where individuals may have foreign income.
Foreign income may include:

-   regular receipts of money, allowances and gifts from relatives
    living overseas
-   income from foreign business interests or investments
-   an overseas pension or benefit
-   employment income derived from overseas

Tax exempt foreign income

Tax exempt foreign income includes allowances and salary of Australian
Defence Force (ADF) personnel deployed to a theatre of war.

Allowances and salary of ADF personnel deployed to a theatre of war, as
declared by the Australian Government (for example, Afghanistan, Iraq),
can be exempt income while the person is physically in the war zone,
that is, from the day they arrive to the day they depart the war zone
and is not included in a customer's ATI. East Timor ceased to be
classified as a war zone from 18 August 2003.

Income for other continuous periods of 91 days or more is recorded as
tax exempt foreign income on the customer's payment summary and they
need to include this as part of their ATI.

The References page contains a link to historical exchange rates (in
Target Foreign Income).

Foreign income for FTB, CCS, CCB and SBP

For FTB, CCS, CCB and SBP purposes, foreign income is the amount of the
following that is neither taxable income in Australia, nor received in
the form of a fringe benefit:

-   any income earned, derived or received from sources outside
    Australia
-   a periodical payment by way of gifts or allowances form a source
    outside Australia
-   a periodical benefit by way of gifts or allowances from a source
    outside Australia

Income estimate

For FTB, CCS, CCB and SBP purposes, the family income estimate includes
two different types of foreign income:

-   foreign income
-   tax exempt foreign income

When providing an income estimate, customers must include the value in
Australian dollars (AUD) of any foreign income they expect to receive.

Note: it is important that customers confirm with the ATO how income
derived from overseas sources will be assessed for tax purposes. If it
is to be included in the customer's Australian Income Tax Return (ITR),
it is not classed as Foreign Income for family assistance. Instead, the
customer must include this income within their estimate as part of their
taxable income or as a reportable fringe benefit. See Resources for
examples.

Tax exempt foreign income is paid in Australian dollars.

If the customer receives an overseas scholarship this may need to be
included as income.

The conversion rate is the 'on demand buying rate' available at the
Commonwealth Bank on 1 July of the tax year in which the income was
received.

If the customer needs help converting the target foreign income to
Australian dollars, the Service Officer can use the exchange rate as at
1 July of the relevant financial year.

The Resources page contains scenarios for updating foreign income.

Related links

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Updating previous financial year incomes for Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Processing claims for Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

Paid Parental Leave income test and previous financial year income
estimate

Foreign income and assets

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
