-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

If you have concerns about a child's safety, conduct the risk and
referral process.

For information on Child Care Subsidy (CCS) changes in relationship
status, see Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims.

This document explains the information required when a person in receipt
of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and/or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) separates
from their partner. A person is considered to be separated when a
marriage or de facto relationship ceases to exist and the couple are
living permanently or indefinitely apart.

Separating Safely

There are key steps a customer should consider when separating in order
to protect their personal details. See Separating Safely - protecting
personal details.

FTB or CCS customer separates

A separate procedure applies if the customer or separated partner
receives an income support payment.

Verification of separation is not required for a customer who is in
receipt of FTB/CCS only unless they continue to reside with their
ex-partner (SUOR). In these cases verification of separation occurs
through the SUOR assessment using a SS293 - Relationship details -
Separated under one roof form. A MOD S is not required.

Separated under one roof (SUOR)

SUOR assessments are done using a Relationship details - Separated under
one roof (SS293) form/s.

SUOR assessments can occur when a relationship has broken down and the
parties are 'living separately and apart' on a permanent or indefinite
basis but remain residing under the same roof. For example, a separated
customer lives with their ex-partner. Sharing may be temporary or
permanent for a variety of reasons.

In determining separated under one roof, each party will need to provide
details of their current living arrangements that supports a conclusion
that a genuine separation has occurred and there are no plans to resume
the relationship.

Note: if a customer is advising they are separated under one roof,
always ask a Family and Domestic Violence (FDV) Risk Identification
Question before issuing the Details of your child's care arrangements
(FA012) and Relationship details - Separated under one roof (SS293):

Are you, or has anyone else been, concerned about your or your family's
safety?

If yes, explore further as per the Family and Domestic Violence Support
Model (FDVSM) to clarify the customer's circumstances. Consider if it is
appropriate to issue the FA012 and SS293 to customer's ex-partner. In
some instances where there is FDV, issuing the forms could put the
customer's safety at risk

If no, tell the customer of the forms that will issue to their
ex-partner and ask the additional question: Is there any other reason we
should not send these forms to your ex-partner to confirm your
separation?

-   If yes, explore further as per the FDVSM to clarify the customer's
    circumstances. Consider if it is appropriate to issue the FA012 and
    SS293 to customer's ex-partner. In some instances where there is
    FDV, issuing the forms could put the customer's safety at risk
-   If no, issue the forms

Details to be checked when customer separates

There is a requirement for FTB and/or CCS customers to provide details
of address, income, child custody, child care and child support after
separation to make sure payments are correct.

When a customer advises they have separated from their partner, the
Service Officer must check whether the following customer details have
changed:

-   Their address or accommodation details. Staff must key 'No' in the
    Make partner the same: field to make sure the address update is not
    applied to the partner record
-   Payment destination details. Staff must make sure their bank account
    details are correct and ask if they wish to have payments made to
    the same account. If they have payments made to a joint account,
    tell them that the former partner will have access to their payment
    and they should open an account in their own name. See Changing
    payment destination
-   Entitlement to an income support payment or additional services or
    benefits
-   Income estimate
-   Children in their care. For children of the former relationship
    remaining in their care, check that they are aware of any initial
    maintenance action that needs to be taken and whether any child
    support arrangement has been made

Note: a Maintenance Action Requirement Notification (MARNL) letter
should be automatically issued to a customer or their current partner if
they are required to take reasonable action to get child support for a
child in their care and they are within their 91 day Deciding
Maintenance Action (DMA) period. A reminder MARNL is also sent to them
21 days after the initial MARNL is sent if:

-   they are still within the DMA period
-   no child support assessment data has been received, and
-   the initial letter was sent on or before day 63 of the DMA period

The MARNL letter is displayed as a 'NOTFAOOSC' letter on the History
Summary (HS) screen.

-   Nominee arrangement. If a customer, who has their partner appointed
    as their nominee, advises they have separated they must be asked at
    first point of contact if they wish to cancel the nominee
    arrangement. A request for cancellation of the arrangement must be
    actioned immediately. The request does not have to be in writing

Customers who incorrectly held/hold the 'RHH' MAT exemption for periods of separation

Before 1 July 2016, there was a known issue that affected customers who
were re-separating from a person against whom they previously had a
child support case. In some cases, rather than reverting to No
Maintenance Action (NMA) at the end of their 91 day Deciding Maintenance
Action (DMA) period, child/ren incorrectly had a 'Reconciliation' (RHH)
MAT exemption code applied, resulting in the child/ren being treated as
permanently exempt from the MAT and payments made to the customer at
above the base rate of FTB Part A.

From 1 July 2016, the RHH MAT code was enhanced to make sure that if a
customer re-separates, RHH will no longer automatically apply after the
DMA period.

Customers who incorrectly held the RHH code as at 1 July 2016 were
reassessed and had a new automatic MAT code of Pseudo DMA Event (PDE)
applied to their records from 1 July 2016 only. This stimulated a
Maintenance Action Requirement Notification (MARNL) letter to be issued
to the customers, as it would have with a DMA period.

As with DMA processing, where they do not take action within 21 days of
the first MARNL being sent, a second MARNL is sent. If they did not take
reasonable action to get child support within 91 days of 1 July 2016,
their MAT was automatically updated to NMA at the end of the 91 days.

Note:

-   The clean up to insert 'PDE' for customers who incorrectly held the
    RHH MAT code as at 1 July 2016 only targeted customers where the
    last un-deleted MAT code before the incorrect RHH was 'DMA'
-   Customers who had a MAT code other than DMA preceding the RHH were
    not selected for the clean up and therefore may still retain the
    incorrect RHH, until a new DMA event occurs post 1 July 2016
-   Any customers identified as potentially incorrectly holding the RHH
    MAT code post 1 July 2016 should be referred to Child Support Unit
    (CSU) to determine if the RHH is correct. Where the RHH is
    incorrect, CSU will refer the case to the National ICT Referral
    Officer (NIRO) to have 'PDE' manually coded

Pseudo Deciding Maintenance Action (PDE) MAT code

'PDE' is an automatic code that is displayed on the Maintenance Action
(MNMA) screen and results in DMA on the Maintenance Action Result (MNMR)
screen. From the December 2016 release, PDE became a manual code that
can only be entered by staff with relevant access.

The Resources page contains links to mySupport and forms that may need
to be sent to the FTB/CCS customer when they advise they have separated
from their partner.

Related links

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Child leaves customer's care/custody

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) claims

Change in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS)

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Permanent vacation of principal home

Changing payment destination

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Claiming JobSeeker Payments (JSP)

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO)

Family and domestic violence

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Update (PPU) authority

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
