-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the policy and procedures that apply when a job
seeker managed under the Targeted Compliance Framework voluntarily
leaves suitable work without reasonable excuse or is dismissed due to
misconduct as an employee.

Leaving suitable work voluntarily or dismissed due to misconduct

Unemployment failures reinforce the expectation that participation
payments are only available to jobseekers who have not deliberately
contributed to their inability to support themselves.

An unemployment failure is committed when a job seeker leaves suitable
work voluntarily without reasonable excuse, or was dismissed due to
misconduct as an employee.

The job seeker’s payment is suspended immediately for a work refusal or
unemployment failure.

Where an unemployment failure has been committed:

-   before claiming a payment, the customer will be subject to an
    unemployment preclusion period of 4 weeks, or 6 weeks where they
    received relocation assistance to move to take up the work
-   while the job seeker is receiving payment, their payment is
    cancelled and they will have a 4 week post cancellation non-payment
    period and will need to re-claim to receive payment again, or 6
    weeks where they have left a relocation job

Note: unemployment failures do not apply to ParentsNext participants.

Provider responsibilities

If a provider identifies that a job seeker has voluntarily left work or
was dismissed due to misconduct as an employee, the provider must talk
to the job seeker about the reasons for their unemployment before
reporting an unemployment failure to Services Australia. Providers book
a contact appointment to discuss the job seeker's reasons for leaving
work and notify the job seeker of the requirement to attend. Job seekers
who fail to attend this appointment and do not make prior contact commit
a mutual obligation failure.

If the provider establishes that the work was suitable and the job
seeker's behaviour constituted misconduct, or they did not have a valid
reason for the leaving work voluntarily, the provider reports this to
Services Australia by sending an electronic transaction, referred to as
a Unemployment Failure Report. Providers are also responsible for
advising Services Australia, via the Unemployment Failure Report, if
relocation assistance has been paid for the work the job seeker has
left.

Service centre or Smart Centre Telephony Service Officer responsibilities

When a potential unemployment failure is identified by a Service Officer
during the new claim process for a participation payment, or while the
job seeker is in receipt of payment, the Service Officer gathers
evidence and, where appropriate, generates an unemployment failure for
investigation.

Employers who contact Services Australia to advise a job seeker has
ceased work voluntarily or due to misconduct should be referred to the
Employer Reporting Line run by the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations. The Resources page contains a link to the website.

Decision maker responsibilities

Service Officers with a UNPP IT security resource are responsible for
investigating and making a decision about unemployment failures
identified at claim, unless the job seeker received relocation
assistance.

Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officers with a WNPPD
security resource are responsible for investigating unemployment
failures where the job seeker left a relocation job or where the
unemployment event occurred while the job seeker was receiving a
participation payment.

These Service Officers are responsible for:

-   investigating unemployment due to a voluntary act or dismissal due
    to misconduct
-   recording the evidence gathered during the investigation using the
    Participation Compliance workflow
-   determining whether an unemployment failure has been committed
-   determining start and end dates of an unemployment preclusions
    period or a post-cancellation non-payment period
-   explaining the decision to the job seeker, including their review
    and appeal rights

Consultation with a PST Service Officer (SO5), PST-skilled social worker
or other specialist officer may be appropriate when assessing the impact
of job seeker circumstances on their capacity to comply. See Accessing a
PST-skilled social worker for information on when consultation with a
PST-skilled social worker may be required or appropriate.

Unemployment preclusion period to be served concurrently

An unemployment preclusion period may be served concurrently with other
preclusion or waiting periods.

If another preclusion or waiting period would extend beyond an
unemployment preclusion period, there is no requirement to proceed with
the generation of an unemployment failure. The decision not to generate
the failure investigation should be documented to facilitate future
generation and investigation if there is a change to other
preclusion/waiting periods, for example, following quality check (QMA)
or a formal review of decision.

Unemployment preclusion period

The unemployment preclusion period generally commences from the day
after the job seeker last worked (date of unemployment). This means that
job seekers who are claiming participation payments may have self-served
part or all of the unemployment preclusion period before claiming
payment.

There are no waiver provisions for customers in financial hardship
during the unemployment preclusion period.

Non-compliance cancellation and post cancellation non-payment period

Where an unemployment failure has been committed while the job seeker is
receiving a participation payment, the payment is cancelled from the
start date of the instalment period following the date the determination
is made that payment will be cancelled because an unemployment failure
has been committed.

There are no waiver provisions for customers in financial hardship
during this period, however the job seeker will maintain a concession
card and benefit rate Family Tax Benefit (FTB) eligibility.

At the end of, or during, the post cancellation non-payment period job
seekers may reclaim payment, however they will be subject to
RapidConnect. The Employment Services System will identify which zone of
the Targeted Compliance Framework applies if payment is re-granted with
most job seekers returning to the zone they were in before the
non-compliance cancellation.

Review and appeal

The job seeker has the right to apply for a formal review of the
decision if they disagree with these decisions:

-   an unemployment failure has been committed
-   the date of effect of an unemployment preclusion period
-   payment cancellation or length of a post cancellation non-payment
    period

The internal review process requires the decision be explained to the
job seeker and a quality check completed.

The job seeker may also apply for a formal review of the decision by an
Authorised Review Officer. The job seeker also has the right to appeal a
decision to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

Transitioning between job seeker compliance systems

Job seekers will transition between job seeker compliance systems where
they change residential address and either commence in, or cease to
participate in the Community Development Program (CDP).

Where the job seeker transfers to a CDP provider:

-   an outstanding unemployment failure may still be investigated and
    applied
-   any unemployment preclusion period or post-cancellation non-payment
    period will remain in place

The Resources page contains a link to a decision maker resource for
unemployment failures under the Targeted Compliance Framework.

Related Links

Targeted Compliance Framework

Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct

Suitable/unsuitable work

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Provider responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Reclaiming a payment after a Targeted Compliance Framework (TCF)
non-compliance cancellation

Conducting compliance investigations

Gathering and assessing evidence for a job seeker compliance
investigation

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

Rejecting a compliance action

Sending free text to providers when compliance action finalised

Participation Compliance workflow

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

Accessing a PST-skilled social worker

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
