
Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines processes to book appointments and manage
obligations for job seekers in the RapidConnect target group who are not
automatically referred to Workforce Australia Online for Individuals.
These job seekers are required to attend their RapidConnect appointment
with their Workforce Australia Employment Services Provider within 14
days. The day a job seeker becomes payable for income support will be
set once they have attended the RapidConnect appointment.

Identifying RapidConnect job seekers requiring an appointment with an Employment Services Provider

The Participation Interview identifies JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth
Allowance (YA) job seekers who are subject to RapidConnect requirements.
If the job seeker is not automatically referred to the Workforce
Australia Online, it is also used to connect job seekers with an
Employment Services Provider by booking the RapidConnect provider
appointment and subsequent interview with Services Australia if
required.

Within the Centrelink system, the Job Seeker RapidConnect (JMRC) screen
displays the history of a job seeker's RapidConnect status. This screen
is used for recording reasons for manually exempting a job seeker from
RapidConnect.

Workforce Australia Online for Individuals

Job seekers participating in the online service are not required to
attend a RapidConnect appointment with a Workforce Australia provider.
Instead, they will meet their RapidConnect obligation by agreeing to
their Job Plan online.

From 4 December 2021, job seekers who are referred to online services
under RapidConnect provisions will need to complete their Career Profile
(known as your Profile in the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations (DEWR) system) before they can agree to their Job Plan online.

The Career Profile is in the DEWR system and is a brief summary of a job
seekers skills and employment record.

Impact of RapidConnect on payability of income support

RapidConnect will determine the payment start date in accordance with
the job seeker's circumstances. Payment may start from:

-   the date the job seeker attended their RapidConnect Appointment
-   the date the Participation Interview was completed
-   the date the original RapidConnect was booked, or
-   the date the completed claim was lodged

Details about RapidConnect start dates may be found at Calculating the
start day general rule.

Booking RapidConnect appointments

Job seekers who require a RapidConnect appointment are referred to an
Employment Services Provider for an appointment ideally within 2 working
days (or up to a maximum of 14 working days) of having the Participation
Interview run and being advised of the requirement to attend.

If a RapidConnect appointment is not available via the Online Diary
within 2 working days, contact the relevant Employment Services Provider
and book the next available RapidConnect appointment within 14 days.

If none of the providers in the customer's area have an appointment
available within 14 working days, the customer can be exempt from
RapidConnect.

Considerations when booking RapidConnect appointments for CDP job seekers

When booking appointments for Community Development Program (CDP) job
seekers, available appointments will display in the Online Diary for the
main CDP provider site and other communities services by the provider
across the CDP region.

This means the Online Diary may show results for CDP sites in locations
which are not within a reasonable commuting distance for the job seeker.
Special care needs to be taken to ensure job seekers are not booked into
CDP sites they are unable to access.

Result of appointment with Employment Services Provider

The provider is required to enter a result of the job seeker's
attendance or failure to attend the RapidConnect appointment. A job
seeker's attendance or non-attendance will be displayed in the
Appointment Summary section of the job seeker's Online Diary.

If the job seeker attends their RapidConnect appointment:

-   the provider is obliged to advise the agency when a job seeker has
    attended their RapidConnect appointment. Once this occurs, income
    support becomes payable

If the job seeker does not attend their RapidConnect appointment:

-   the provider is to enter a free text reason of up to 150 characters
    why the job seeker did not attend if known
-   the provider may contact the job seeker to discuss the
    non-attendance and book another appointment with the job seeker. If
    this is within 14 days of the Participation Interview originally
    being run, the job seeker will be paid from the correct start date
    under RapidConnect rules. See Rescheduling and Rebooking
    RapidConnect appointments for further information

Employment Services Provider fails to enter an appointment result

The provider has until the close of business of the day after the job
seeker's scheduled appointment in which to enter the appointment result.

If the provider has not entered a result by this time, a 'No Result
Entered (NRE)' flag will be sent back to the agency to indicate that the
provider has not entered a result in the appropriate timeframe. This
will mean that the job seeker will have met their RapidConnect
obligations and can therefore be paid their income support payment from
the relevant date.

Rescheduling RapidConnect appointments

Service Officers and Employment Services Providers can reschedule the
RapidConnect appointment with the provider as long as:

-   the appointment is still in the future, and
-   a result has not been recorded for that appointment

Service Officers and Employment Services Providers are required to
determine whether a request to reschedule a RapidConnect appointment is
for an acceptable reason. Their decision will determine a job seekers
payment start date.

When rescheduling the RapidConnect appointment, Service Officers need to
ensure that the appointment is made within 14 days from the date of the
Participation Interview being run and determine a job seeker's payment
start date. If this is not done, the job seeker's income support payment
start date may be affected.

Service Officers must tell the job seeker about their appointment
details verbally or in writing, as a letter will not auto-issue to the
job seeker for provider appointments.

Where an appointment date has passed or an appointment result has been
entered, then the appointment can no longer be rescheduled and the
appointment will need to be rebooked.

The Process page contains the steps required for assessing if a job
seeker is subject to RapidConnect, rescheduling appointments and
assessment of start date eligibility.

Rebooking RapidConnect appointments

If the job seeker contacts Services Australia as they missed their
RapidConnect appointment and the provider has not already rebooked the
RapidConnect appointment, Service Officers can rebook the appointment
using the Participation Interview, provided:

the original claim was completed:

-   online, or
-   via the Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) workflow, and

it is still within 14 days of the Participation Interview being run

When rebooking the RapidConnect appointment, Service Officers need to
ensure that the appointment is made within 14 days from the date of the
Participation Interview being run and the job seeker being advised of
their obligation to attend a RapidConnect appointment. If this is not
done, the job seeker's income support payment start date may be
affected.

If there are no appointments available, the Service Officer will need to
contact the provider and request an appointment for the job seeker.

Ensure that the job seeker is advised about their appointment details
verbally or in writing.

If the appointment is outside the 14 days, then the entire Participation
Interview will need to be re-run.

If a job seeker's income support claim has already been granted
(including where the status is current zero rate (CZR)) the RapidConnect
appointment is no longer able to be rebooked. The job seeker will need
to be exempt from RapidConnect and have an initial appointment booked.
The Service Officer will need to contact the provider to request they
book this appointment for the job seeker.

The Process page contains the steps required for assessing if a job
seeker is subject to RapidConnect, rescheduling appointments, rebooking
appointments and assessment of start date eligibility.

Related links

RapidConnect

RapidConnect exemptions

Selection or allocation of a Workforce Australia Employment Service
Provider

Online Diary

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Participation Interview

Employment assistance and Employment Services Providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
