-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage compulsory Quarterly Participation
Interviews (QTI) for job seekers assessed in an Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) as having a Partial
Capacity to Work (PCW) or a Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (TRWC) of
either 0-7 or 8-14 hours per week.

Purpose of the QTI

The purpose of the QTI is to make sure job seekers remain engaged with
Services Australia and are aware of their compulsory requirements to
attend the quarterly participation interviews and other voluntary
participation options. These interviews are conducted every 12 weeks.

Job seekers with QTI requirements are still required to report and
should be encouraged to use [] self service options (online accounts,
Express Plus Mobile Apps and phone self service) to complete their
report. They can also report in person at a service centre or submit
their report in writing (SU19 form).

PCW job seekers

A job seeker has a PCW of less than 15 hours per week if both their
current and future work capacity with intervention, as assessed in an
ESAt or JCA, is less than 15 hours per week.

Job seekers with a PCW of 15-29 hours per week are not required to
attend a QTI, unless they also have a TRWC of less than 15 hours per
week.

For more information about requirements for all job seekers with a PCW,
see Job seekers with a partial capacity to work or a temporary reduced
work capacity.

Requirement to attend a QTI

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements are required to attend a
QTI every 12 weeks if they have an assessed work capacity of:

-   PCW of 0-7 or 8-14 hours per week, or
-   TRWC of 0-7 or 8-14 hours per week for 12 weeks or more

The criteria includes Centrelink managed job seekers living in a
designated Community Development Program (CDP) area. If the job seeker
fails to attend the appointment, suspend their payment to prompt them to
make contact with the agency.

The QTI activity must be coded on the job seeker’s Activity and
Exemption Summary (AEX) screen. The Job Plan also needs to be updated
where appropriate.

QTI requirements apply to all job seekers with a PCW or TRWC of 0-14
hours per week who are not fully meeting their requirements through paid
employment or self-employment. A job seeker cannot end their QTI
requirement early because they wish to be connected to a Workforce
Australia, CDP or Disability Employment Services (DES) provider. These
job seekers can volunteer to participate in employment services. Note:
job seekers assessed with a TRWC of 0-7 cannot volunteer with a DES
provider.

Note: job seekers who are only assessed as having TRWC of 0-7 or 8-14
hours per week of less than 12 weeks duration are required to attend the
Initial QTI appointment. The purpose of this appointment is for Services
Australia to discuss the mutual obligation requirements during this
period with the customer, code the QTI activity on the AEX screen and
update the Job Plan where appropriate. However, these customers do not
have ongoing QTI requirements. They are also required to report and to
attend compulsory Services Australia interviews when requested. If the
TRWC is extended beyond 12 weeks, then ongoing QTI appointments will be
required.

PCW or TRWC job seekers meeting mutual obligation requirements

If a PCW or TRWC job seeker is in paid employment or self-employment
within their assessed bandwidth, they are fully satisfying their mutual
obligation requirements, and will not be subject to QTI requirements.
These job seekers must have the appropriate approved activity recorded
on the AEX screen, for example ‘PTW’ for paid work or ‘SEL’ for
self-employment. The Job Plan also needs to be updated where
appropriate.

Triggering the QTI requirement

A job seeker can only be assessed as having a PCW or a TRWC recommended
by an ESAt report or a JCA report.

When the ESAt/JCA report is accepted by the agency and the job seeker
has been assessed as PCW or TRWC of 0-14 hours per week:

-   an Initial QTI Service Component will be ‘STA’rted, and
-   an appointment automatically booked for 2 weeks after the ESAt/JCA
    acceptance date

The initial appointment is to make sure the:

-   job seeker is advised of their compulsory QTI attendance requirement
    and their voluntary participation options, as soon as possible after
    the acceptance of the ESAt report, and
-   AEX screen is updated, and Job Plan is negotiated (where
    appropriate)

The ESAt/JCA report will still display with a status of ‘submitted’ for
28 days until the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations’
(DEWR) system auto-updates this to ‘finalised’. This does not affect the
commencement of QTI requirements, as they are effective from the date
the report was accepted by Services Australia.

When the ESAt/JCA report is accepted, the 12 week count for the ongoing
QTI will automatically begin. The duration of the 12 week count will not
change, until the PCW/TRWC of 0-14 hours per week status ends or
changes.

Circumstances when the QTI requirement will not trigger

The QTI will not be required if the job seeker:

-   has an exemption from their mutual obligation requirements, such as
    being temporarily incapacitated for all work, or
-   is in self-employment or paid employment that meets their mutual
    obligation requirements, or
-   does not have a current and valid assessment of their work capacity

Exemption from QTI

Job seekers do not require a QTI if they have a current exemption from
their mutual obligation requirements. This includes job seekers granted
a temporary incapacity exemption because they have lodged a medical
certificate.

Note: if the job seeker is granted an exemption from mutual obligation
requirements after the appointment booking occurs, the QTI appointment
is not automatically cancelled. Service Officers should check if there
is a future booked QTI appointment at the time of coding the exemption,
if so, then manually cancel the appointment and advise the customer as
appropriate.

A job seeker will be required to attend a QTI if they have a TRWC of 0-7
hours per week and cannot be granted a temporary incapacity exemption,
or if they do have a temporary incapacity exemption that expires before
the TRWC end date.

QTI cycles

The QTI requirements start after the ESAt/JCA report acceptance date.

Service Component 707 (QTI Initial Phone) or 708 (QTI Initial Face to
Face) will automatically start when the ESAt report is accepted. The
Initial QTI appointment type is automatically booked for 2 weeks after
the ESAt/JCA acceptance date. This appointment is to make sure the QTI
activity is coded on the AEX screen and the Job Plan is updated (where
appropriate).

Service Component 710 (QTI Ongoing Phone) or 711 (QTI Ongoing Face to
Face) requirements will be determined once the Initial QTI interview is
completed, the QTI activity is coded on the AEX screen and the Job Plan
is updated. The first ongoing QTI service component will be generated at
approximately 10 weeks from the date the ESAt/JCA is accepted, if it is
still required. This Service Component is for the purposes of conducting
the ongoing quarterly (12 weekly) interviews, to discuss the job
seeker’s circumstances, options available to them and to make sure they
understand their obligations.

The 12 week count continues uninterrupted regardless of any delays,
rescheduling, or exemptions. Therefore, QTI appointments will be
completed at 12, 24, 36 weeks etc. This start date also applies to TRWC
job seekers who were originally assessed as having a reduced work
capacity for less than 12 weeks but have had their period of reduced
work capacity extended past 12 weeks.

Conducting the QTI

The Service Profiling Update workflow is used to conduct the QTI
interview with the job seeker. The workflow provides a checklist of
appropriate actions and discussion topics. For information about
conducting the QTI, see Step 8 on the Process page.

Job Plan Item for QTI job seekers

The agency must negotiate a Job Plan with job seekers who have been
assessed as having a PCW or TRWC of 0-14 hours per week, after the QTI
activity is coded on the AEX screen as part of the QTI Initial
appointment. This includes job seekers with a TRWC of 0-14 hours per
week for less than 12 weeks.

When the Job Plan workflow is launched, the Job Plan will auto-populate
the ‘Reduced Work Capacity’ Job Plan item and the following sentence
text:

‘I will attend all appointments made for me. If I am unable to attend an
appointment, I will advise Centrelink before my appointment time.’

Note: the Job Plan item must not be removed from the Job Plan even if
the job seeker volunteers for employment services.

If a job seeker continues to participate in DES, the Job Plan should not
be updated by the agency, as the DES provider will update the Job Plan
with the QTI activity.

Related links

Job Plans

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

28 day review of Job Plans

Altered processes and mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due
to coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Job seekers with a partial capacity to work or a temporary reduced work
capacity

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity
to work (PCW)

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a temporary reduced
work capacity (TRWC)

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Checking and actioning a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report

Checking and actioning Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Understanding Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports

Understanding Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Assessing and coding medical evidence for temporary incapacity
exemptions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
