-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for actioning Approved Activity
Reviews.

Changes from 1 July 2021

From 1 July 2021, Post Approved Activity Reviews (PAA's) were replaced
by online tasks, work items or request to contact letters for job
seekers who are not signed up for self-service. The notification is
issued 28 days from the expiry of the approved activity on the Activity
and Exemption Summary (AEX) screen.

Some of these online tasks must be actioned by a Service Officer before
they can be finalised. Secondly, job seekers now have the option of
advising online if there has been a change in their circumstances if it
relates to their recorded approved activity or exemption.

Online - AEX and Job Plan review work item

Service Officers who have been allocated the Online - AEX and Job Plan
review work item (ZALL_JSK_PLN) may be required to contact the job
seeker and determine if an update needs to be made to their approved
activity recorded on the Activity and Exemption Summary (AEX) screen.

If the work item:

has been created because the job seeker has actioned their online task
and indicated that they are continuing their current activity, Service
Officers should:

-   update the AEX screen by extending the current activity for 363 days
-   create a new Job Plan for the job seeker to agree to online. Note:
    this process does not apply for job seekers participating in DES
    (DPA, DPB) or Quarterly Participation Interview (QTI)

relates to a change in circumstance, Service Officers should determine
what action is required in relation to mutual obligations from the notes
provided by the job seeker

DES participants will have their Job Plan negotiated by DES provider

QTI job seekers will have an appointment automatically booked to update
AEX and Job Plan

Participation Summary screen

An Action Item message will appear on the job seeker's Participation
Summary screen.

Updating of approved activities from contact with job seekers will be
done via the Activity and Exemption Summary (AEX) screen.

Failing to attend an interview

Before 1 July 2021, if the job seeker failed to attend the appointment,
their payment would be suspended with the reason 'Failed to Attend
Interview' (FAI) to prompt contact with Services Australia.

From 1 July 2021, as no appointments will be booked for job seekers,
there will be no suspension of payments if they fail to contact or
complete their online task. If their approved requirement expires, then
job seeker management activities will be invoked and they will be
referred to a provider.

Related links

Job Plans

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
