-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when part-time or full-time study can be accepted
as an approved requirement for Parenting Payment (PP) job seekers with
mutual obligation requirements.

Approved study for PP job seeker with mutual obligation requirements

PP job seekers can participate in full-time or part-time study to meet
their mutual obligation requirements.

PP job seekers are not subject to short course policy like JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) or YA job seekers. They are also not required to claim for
a student payment when they commence full-time study. Unlike JSP and YA
job seekers, PP job seekers do not have to meet the definition of
'unemployed' (which can be impacted by full-time study) to retain
qualification for payment.

PP job seekers undertaking approved qualifying study for PP should be
taken as meeting their mutual obligation requirements and the study must
be included on the Activity and Exemption (AEX) screen.

PP job seekers who are undertaking approved study immediately prior to
transferring to JSP or YA job seeker, will be allowed to complete the
remainder of the same course of study that they commenced while
receiving PP.

Approval criteria

For PP job seekers with mutual obligation requirements, an approved
course of study is one that is of a vocational nature, and where the job
seeker is undertaking at least 15 hours per week, or 30 hours per
fortnight, including any combination of contact and non-contact hours.

Note: the above does not apply to Skills for Education and Employment
(SEE) and the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP). SEE and AMEP must be
considered as full-time, when the job seeker is undertaking at least 20
hours of face-to-face study per week to fully meet mutual obligation
requirements.

Post-graduate study, including Masters and Doctoral study, will not be
approved. However, where it is evident that further study would increase
the likelihood of employment and long-term self-sufficiency for a PP job
seeker, post-graduate education may be approved to meet their mutual
obligation requirements.

Approval process

Where a PP job seeker is studying in a course that is less than 12
months, either Services Australia or their Workforce Australia provider
can approve the course.

PP job seekers studying in a course that is longer than 12 months can
only have the course approved by Services Australia. Ideally, the
provider should be involved in discussing any intention to study with
the job seeker.

Mutual obligation requirements

PP job seekers who are fully meeting their mutual obligation
requirements through approved study are not required to look for work or
participate in employment services.

If the PP job seeker has a break from their study that is greater than
three weeks, then the job seeker is required to undertake other approved
requirements such as job search, for the period of the break. This
includes normal breaks between semesters or terms, when the customer is
still enrolled as a student and this should be taken into consideration
when deciding on the requirement.

If the PP job seeker is waiting to commence study, they are still
required to look for work. In these cases, the customer should search
for suitable employment that does not preclude them from undertaking
their course of study. The PP recipient would be required to seek
temporary, part-time or casual work, even if only for a short period.

Studying less than 15 hours per week

A principal carer of a dependent child with a part-time mutual
obligation requirement of 15 hours per week would be required to
supplement study of less than 15 hours per week with job search or a
combination of requirements. Services Australia can approve a
combination of study and part-time work, or study and self-employment,
where the total hours between the two requirements are at least 15 hours
per week, or 30 hours per fortnight.

If the requirement is a part-time course, and the job seeker is
identifies as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander, they may also be
eligible for ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance. If the job seeker is
thinking about applying for ABSTUDY for the part-time course, then the
course cannot be an approved requirement as a job seeker is not eligible
for ABSTUDY assistance if the same course of study is approved by the
provider. They will, however, be eligible to apply for ABSTUDY
assistance if the course is only a voluntary component.

PP customers with no mutual obligation requirements

PP customers who do not have mutual obligation requirements may
undertake full-time and part-time study on a voluntary basis, including
higher degrees such as Masters and Doctoral study, at any time. They are
not required to have their study approved.

When PP customers who do not have mutual obligation requirements
voluntarily access a provider, they should be encouraged to discuss any
intention to study with their provider. The provider may approve the
study as part of the customer's voluntary requirements, however,
provider approval is not required for the customer to undertake studies.

Studying during a period of Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (TRWC) or Partial Capacity to Work (PCW)

Job seekers assessed as having a TRWC or PCW of 0-7 or 8-14 hours per
week can volunteer to participate in part-time or full-time study.
However, these job seekers will still have Quarterly Participation
Interviews (QTI) as their only compulsory requirement.

The Resources page contains FAQs relating to full-time short course
approval for job seekers, a link to full-time study options for working
age job seekers, the Request for course approval (SS362) form and
contact details for the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations.

Related links

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Coding new study details

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

Part-time or full-time study as an approved requirement for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

Part-time or full-time study as an approved mutual obligation
requirement for Youth Allowance (YA)

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customers returning to (or continuing in)
part-time study

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker or Australian Apprentice returning to
full-time study

Youth Allowance (YA) job seekers returning to part-time study

Mutual obligation requirements for Special Benefit (SpB)

ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance

Quarterly Participation Interviews for Partial Capacity to Work and
Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (0-7 or 8-14 hours per week) job seekers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
