-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria and requirements of a
job seeker when participating in Work for the Dole (WFD) under Workforce
Australia employment services.

About Workforce Australia - Work for the Dole

Entry into the WFD program provides job seekers with an opportunity to
improve their job prospects, get valuable work experience and help their
local community.

Note: for information regarding requirements under Community Development
Program, see Community Development Program (CDP).

Work for the Dole is the mandatory activity for eligible job seekers in
Workforce Australia Services who have not met their activation
requirement by the activation point. Job seekers can earn points for
attendance at the activity, which contribute towards their points
target.

Job seekers undertaking WFD will have their requirements negotiated by
their provider. Providers use the Targeted Compliance Framework to
manage WFD requirements.

Services Australia does not place job seekers in WFD, but is responsible
for informing job seekers of their mutual obligation requirements and
determining if financial penalties apply for mutual obligation where job
seekers have not met their requirements and are in the financial penalty
zone.

The job seeker continues to be subject to the usual requirements to
comply with requests from Services Australia and to meet their mutual
obligation requirements throughout their placement on WFD.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations (DEWR) website regarding Work for the Dole (WFD) as
well as WFD provider contacts in each state and territory.

Work for the Dole requirements

Work for the Dole is for job seekers participating in Workforce
Australia or Community Development Program. It is a work experience
program, which places job seekers in requirements where they can build
new skills, experience and confidence to move from welfare to work while
giving back to their community. A variety of WFD requirements and
placements are available. Some examples include:

-   computer graphics work
-   animal or wildlife shelter requirements
-   retail work
-   rehabilitation of public parks
-   office administration
-   warehouse duties
-   gardening and maintenance

Requirements must provide benefit to the broader community, improve
employment prospects of participants and reduce alienation of unemployed
people from their community.

WFD

The provider has full responsibility for placing job seekers in a WFD
requirement.

Service Officers cannot place job seekers in WFD and must direct job
seekers interested in participating in WFD to their provider to discuss
placement.

Compulsory Work for the Dole requirements

Job seekers aged 18 to 49 years who are receiving a full rate of income
support payment will normally have Work for the Dole as a mandatory
activation task to meet their requirements.

When the job seeker commences in a mandatory activation task, the
provider will enter it into the job seeker's Job Plan and advise the job
seeker that they must comply with the requirement. The requirement will
automatically display on the Activities and Exemptions Summary Screen
(AEX), showing the start and end dates.

Voluntary participation

Job seekers under 18 years of age cannot participate in WFD, even if
they wish to volunteer.

Job seekers receiving employment assistance as a volunteer (base online
service) are not eligible to do WFD.

Principal Carer Parents and those assessed as having a Partial Capacity
to Work who do not have compulsory participation requirements of any age
can volunteer for Work for the Dole.

Job seekers aged 50 and over with full-time mutual obligation
requirements must undertake tasks and activities to meet their points
target, and may volunteer to undertake Work for the Dole as part of
these requirements.

Job seekers aged 50 and over, with full-time mutual obligation
requirements, cannot be compelled to undertake Work for the Dole.
However, if they choose to voluntarily undertake Work for the Dole to
meet their requirements, the requirement must be entered as a mandatory
activation task in the Job Plan by their provider.

A job seeker receiving a part-rate income support cannot be compelled to
participate in Work for the Dole or another approved program of work.
These job seekers can participate in Work for the Dole as a voluntary
participant.

Payments, supplement and services during Work for the Dole

Work for the Dole participants remain entitled to their income support
payment (that is, JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Special Benefit (SpB), Youth
Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP) or Parenting Payment
(PP)) and receive an additional fortnightly supplement to assist with
the costs of their WFD placement. Job seekers are eligible for the
Approved Program of Work Supplement (APWS) regardless of the WFD
requirement being undertaken on a compulsory or voluntary base, to help
with the costs of attendance.

Job seekers are not able to be in receipt of the APWS and the Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) at the same time.

Job seekers may be eligible for Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)
(Transition to Work) whilst participating in work for the dole.

Suspension of APWS

Job seekers who are exempt from their mutual obligation requirements and
who do not continue to voluntarily participate during the exemption
period, at any stage during an entitlement period, will have their APWS
suspended. The suspension will be applied from the exemption start date
for job seekers with mutual obligation requirements. The supplement will
be reinstated on the following day after the exemption has ended, unless
the job seeker volunteered to participate within the exemption period.
In this case, the supplement will only be paid if there was
participation during the entitlement period.

Work for the Dole requirements under CDP

For information regarding requirements under Community Development
Program, see Community Development Program (CDP).

Participation in Work for the Dole

As part of negotiating a WFD requirement:

-   job seekers are expected to take personal responsibility for working
    with their provider to identify circumstances that have the
    potential to impact on their ability to participate so that
    requirements are appropriate to their circumstances
-   providers must ensure that the compulsory requirement is consistent
    with relevant legislation and policies, do not exceed prescribed
    maximum limits set out in social security law and that they have
    considered the job seeker's personal circumstances and assessed
    capacity

The Job Plan includes the WFD requirement. These are scheduled by the
provider.

Providers are responsible for managing compliance of these requirements
under the Targeted Compliance Framework. For further information, see
Failing to attend or satisfactorily participate in a compulsory
activity.

The Resources page contains a link to the DEWR website regarding Work
for the Dole (WFD).

Contents

Approved Program of Work Supplement

Community Development Program (CDP)

Related links

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Provider responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Failing to attend or satisfactorily participate in a compulsory activity

Targeted Compliance Framework

Mutual obligation failures under the Targeted Compliance Framework

Job seeker change of address

Assessing and coding medical evidence for temporary incapacity
exemptions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
