-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document explains the issues that may lead to homelessness. It
gives information about external and Services Australia products,
services and procedures that may be offered to customers who are
homeless.

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour, which raises
concerns about a child or young person's safety, Services Australia sets
out specific steps that must be taken. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child for more information about this
model and the agency's commitment to the safety of children and young
people.

Homelessness definition

Services Australia defines 'homelessness' as someone:

without conventional accommodation (for example, sleeping rough,
squatting, living in a car), or

who lives in, or moves frequently between, temporary accommodation
arrangements:

-   for example, with friends or extended family, emergency
    accommodation, youth refuges

Services Australia defines 'at risk of homelessness' as someone:

lives medium to long term in a boarding house, caravan park or hotel,
where accommodation is not covered by a lease

lives in accommodation which falls below the general community standards
which surround health and well-being:

-   such as access to personal amenities, security against threat,
    privacy and autonomy

is facing eviction

lives in accommodation not of an appropriate standard:

-   which may be detrimental to their physical and mental well-being,
    and/or
-   where they have no sense of belonging or connection
-   for example, Indigenous Australians living in crowded conditions
    and/or disconnected from their land, family/kin, spiritual and
    cultural beliefs and practices

Note: staff must consider the individual's own perception about the
suitability of their accommodation when applying this definition.

Contributing factors

Services Australia plays a crucial role in helping people who are
homeless or at risk of homelessness to access income support, stabilise
their accommodation and participate in society as fully as possible.

The agency's commitment to people who are homeless is to address social
and economic exclusion, and respond to both the structural and
individual factors that contribute to homelessness. These factors
include:

-   structural factors such as poverty, lack of affordable housing and
    unemployment
-   personal factors that may include poor health, a disability, and
    social and cultural issues

A Homelessness Indicator identifies a customer who is homeless or at
risk of becoming homeless. Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) for these
indicators can be found in Homelessness Indicators document.

Service Officer role

When a customer is experiencing, or is at risk of homelessness, Service
Officers must make sure they are given additional support and
information to:

-   lodge a claim for an income support payment, if they are not on
    payment
-   apply for a formal review of a decision, if they disagree with it

Service officers should:

-   code a Homelessness Indicator on the customer's record, if the
    customer consents
-   consider whether an internal referral to an agency specialist is
    needed
-   consider if an external referral within the community is needed,
    such as emergency accommodation or welfare agency help
-   consider any other circumstances identified by the customer that may
    impact compliance and would need to be recorded on the Circumstances
    Impacting Compliance screen

If the customer has compulsory participation requirements and a
Homelessness Indicator is recorded, information about the risk of, or
ongoing or temporary homelessness will automatically show under the
title of Accommodation Arrangements on the Circumstances Impacting
Compliance screen. The circumstance will display as 'Automatically
created - yet to assess impact' until a Service Officer needs to assess
the impact of this circumstance on compliance. This does not need to be
actioned at the time of recording the Homelessness Indicator. This
information will automatically update when further changes are made to
the Homelessness Indicator.

The Resources page has links to the Services Australia Website for
Social Work Services and information on accommodation.

Related links

Indigenous homelessness

Where customers are unable to provide a residential address

Homelessness Indicators

Circumstances impacting job seeker compliance

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) referral

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) overview

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Community Engagement Officers (CEOs)

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Social work services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
