-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL/DAP details for customers with children born or entering care before
1 July 2023 only.

This document outlines how to process a claim for Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP). DAP is paid under the Paid Parental Leave (PPL) scheme and aims
to support dads or partners expecting to care for a child.

Claim submitted online

When an individual submits a claim online, a new claim Work Item is
created on their record so the claim can be allocated for processing.

DAP claims are processed in Process Direct.

Customer assisted claims

The Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) workflow is used to enter information
collected from a customer over the phone or face-to-face.

Some remote Indigenous customers or families in crisis may have
completed a claim with a Service Officer using ACC. The customer will
need to accept the Verbal Signature Declaration or sign and return the
Families Declaration Form (FDF) issued via ACC so their claim can be
submitted.

Claim form or documents lodged

Service Officers will:

-   check all required information and documents is available to allow
    the claim to be finalised
-   request extra information/documents from the customer if required
    (the extra information can often be obtained by phone), see
    Requesting information (CLK) for more information

When a Claim for Dad and Partner Pay (FA080) is scanned to the
customer's record, a Social Application (SOA) shell Work Item is
generated. This new claim activity contains no claim information apart
from the Customer Reference Number (CRN), personal details and the
receipt date (date of claim).

-   Claim information needs to be manually updated within the Work Item
    using information from the scanned claim and associated
    documentation
-   Where a paper claim did not create a new claim activity, a SOA shell
    must be manually created via the Process Direct Landing page

Claims must be coded and processed using the correct date of receipt
(DOR). The DOR is the first date the customer's claim was received. The
DOR can sometimes differ from the 'capture date'. Staff can confirm the
correct date in Documents in Process Direct. This screen displays the
'date of receipt' and 'capture date'.

Finalising DAP claims when a pre-birth claim has been assessed

If a DAP pre-birth claim has been assessed (DAP/PND-POB), proof of the
child's birth is required for the claim to be finalised.

If the customer's partner or another person provides proof of the
child's birth (FA081) and is claiming PPL and/or Family Tax Benefit
(FTB), the DAP claim should be finalised at the same time.

When proof of birth is provided, the child needs to be linked to the DAP
pre-birth claim via a reassessment activity (where the DAP claim is not
automatically finalised as part of their partner's post-birth PPL claim
finalisation). Ensure that an exhaustive search has been done to find
any existing child record. This will minimise the risk of creating
multiple records.

If the customer has lodged an incomplete FA081 or only the back page of
the FA081 and has not lodged an online or paper claim, contact the
customer to collect the missing information. The incomplete FA081 can be
printed by the Service Officer and sent to the customer to complete. If
their details and their newborn child's details have been provided on
the FA081 it may be appropriate to collect the missing information
verbally from the customer. This will ensure the correct child details
are applied to their record.

Customers in receipt of an income support payment (ISP) may incur an
overpayment if their DAP nominated start date is in the past. DAP is
treated as income when calculating the rate of payment for ISP.

If the customer submitted a DAP pre-birth claim for a child whose
expected date of birth or adoption was before 1 July 2023 and the
child's actual date of birth or adoption is on or after 1 July 2023, the
DAP claim will be rejected once proof of birth/entry to care is
provided. The rejection letter will invite the customer to claim PPL.
See Eligibility for Parental Leave for children born or entering care on
or after 1 July 2023.

Customers overseas

If the customer is overseas or departing to go overseas within 21 days
of lodging the claims, transfer the claim to Families International
Claims (FIC) to be finalised.

Relationship to child

A DAP customer must be an eligible father or partner to receive DAP.
Birth mothers are not eligible for DAP.

If the DAP customer's relationship to the child cannot be established
from the claim details, the Service Officer will need to contact the
customer to determine what relationship the customer has to the child,
for example surrogacy arrangement or commissioning parent.

The Resources page contains examples of using proof of birth across
Centrelink and Medicare programmes and suggested letter text for Q777
and Q999 letters, DAP Accommodation Details (AC) coding, a link to the
Level 2 Policy Helpdesk, links to the Services Australia and myGov
websites. It also contains keyword explanations for DAP pre-birth claims
excluded from automation.

Related links

Change in circumstance for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and claims

Information requests for FTB, PPL, DAP and CCB lump sum claims

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP)

Online and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) for Family Assistance,
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test

Processing proof of a child's birth

Processing standalone and combined claims for family assistance and/or
Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

Rejection and not effective codes for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
