-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the cancellation process for FTB. FTB payments
may be cancelled automatically by the system or manually by a Service
Officer.

Automatic cancellation

Automatic cancellation of FTB occurs following reassessments where no
continuing entitlement exists, for example, when a child leaves care. If
a change in circumstance is recorded and the customer is no longer
entitled to FTB, payment will be automatically cancelled from the date
of effect of the change in circumstance.

Payments can also be automatically cancelled without a reassessment. For
example, FTB customers who have become partnered, but have not provided
their partner's Tax File Number (TFN) will have their FTB payment
cancelled if the TFN is not provided or an exemption recorded within 28
days of the date the TFN was requested.

Income support payment (ISP) customers

When a customer's income support payment (ISP) is cancelled or reduced
to zero because they have commenced an employment income nil rate
period, an automatic request is sent to them for an estimate of their
income to confirm their entitlement to FTB. A grace period of 21 days is
allowed for them to provide the estimate. If the income estimate is not
received by the end of the 21 days, FTB is cancelled with reason 'OIS'
(Off income support).

When a customer's family income estimate is identified as unreasonable
within an ISP new claim or self service update, that is, their current
estimate, is not high enough to cover the ISP paid, an automatic request
is sent for a revised estimate. A grace period of 21 days is allowed to
provide an acceptable estimate. If a reasonable income estimate is not
received by the end of the 21 days, FTB is cancelled with reason 'ENR'
(Estimate Not Reasonable).

Manual cancellation

Manual cancellation occurs when a Service Officer makes a decision to
cancel a customer's payment based on the applicable section of Family
Assistance Law or Social Security Law and codes the cancellation.

Customer requests cancellation

FTB instalment customers may ask to cancel their FTB fortnightly
payments to reduce the chance of an overpayment and claim any extra FTB
after the end of the income year. These customers should be encouraged
to choose the defer FTB Part A and Part B payment choice rather than
have their FTB cancelled. They will not need to lodge a claim at the end
of the income year and will receive any top-up payment automatically
once income tax returns are lodged by the end of the lodgement year.

Note: FTB will continue at a zero rate (CZR-ITH or CZR-IEU) for
instalment customers, where the customer has provided a revised family
income estimate that reduces the legislative rate of payment to nil. The
customer's entitlement will be confirmed at reconciliation.

If they insist on cancellation of FTB in preference to 'current zero
rate' or the More Choice for Families payment choices, they should be
advised that:

-   Rent Assistance (RA) will be cancelled when FTB is cancelled
-   RA is not payable with a standalone lump sum FTB claim unless the
    customer is not entitled to claim ongoing FTB instalments with their
    lump sum claim. To be paid arrears of FTB and RA, they will need to
    reclaim FTB as fortnightly payments and complete the FTB Supplement
    form
-   They will need to lodge a claim for FTB and income tax returns
    before the end of the lodgement year to receive a top-up payment of
    FTB and avoid a debt for the relevant income year

If the customer is receiving Child Care Subsidy (CCS) they may want to
increase their withholdings.

The Resources page contains a link to Debt Recovery Team contact
details.

Related links

Cancellation, rejection and Current Zero Rate codes for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
