-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL/DAP details for customers with children born or entering care before
1 July 2023 only.

This document outlines information on how to assess a claim for Dad and
Partner Pay (DAP). Customers may have submitted a claim online, lodged a
paper claim or provided information to finalise a pending claim.

Claim requirements

For DAP to be paid the customer must:

-   meet the DAP eligibility requirements
-   submit an [] online claim or lodge a paper claim before the child's
    first birthday or anniversary of the date the child entered care if
    adopted (early claims may be lodged up to 3 months (97 days) before
    the child's expected birth or entry into care)
-   provide all information and documentation required to assess the
    claim

Proof of birth

Proof of the child's birth is required for the customer's claim to be
finalised.

Proof of the child's birth provided by the DAP claimant or their partner
can be used as verification of birth for DAP.

If the person lodging proof of birth is a biological parent of the
child, they will need to register or apply to register the child's birth
as required by the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registry.

If there is an adoption or surrogacy arrangement and the customer is not
a biological parent, they will need to provide evidence of the
arrangement.

If a child is stillborn or dies, the Claim for Bereavement Payment form
(FA008) including a completed proof of birth page will be used as
verification.

Lodging evidence

In some cases, the customer may be required to provide:

-   evidence to support the DAP income test
-   evidence to support the DAP work test
-   evidence of meeting Australian residence requirements

Customers can provide these documents in person or they can fax or post
copies of their evidence (for example, payslips) as originals do not
need to be provided.

Timeframe for claiming and nominated start date

Customers can lodge a claim for DAP up to 3 months (97 days) before
their child's expected date of birth or entry into care.

Claims must be lodged within 52 weeks of the child's birth or entry into
care. DAP is not payable after the child's first birthday or the first
anniversary of their entrustment into care (for adoptions) or entry into
care (for surrogacy arrangements).

This is the date nominated by the customer for their Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP) period to start. It can be the date of the child's birth or entry
into care, or another date they have nominated.

The nominated start date:

-   cannot be before the birth of the child or the entry into care
-   must be before 12 months (52 weeks) from the child's date of birth
    or entry into care date, and
-   can be a date in the past

Note: to be paid the full 2 weeks entitlement of DAP, the customer needs
to nominate a start date 14 days before the child's first birthday or
anniversary of entry into care date.

Customers will still be able to submit a claim for DAP if their child’s
expected date of birth or adoption is on or after 1 July 2023. However
customers will be advised they may prefer to claim PPL after their child
is born or comes into care instead.

Straight through processing

Straight through processing is where a claim or service is assessed
using criteria to identify if it is suitable for an automated grant
outcome.

The system may process pre-birth claims for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
automatically if they meet certain criteria.

If a claim meets the criteria for an automated assessment, DOCs or
Display Notes on the customer's record will show that ROXY has created
these.

If it does not meet the business rules for an automatic assessment it
will be allocated to staff to manually process.

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the decision, the Service Officer must enter their own logon as the
Decision Maker and the customer's local service centre when running the
script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY.

Processing DAP claims

DAP claims are processed in Process Direct.

Select the Transactions icon to check the status of claim submitted
online or using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC). When a Claim for Dad and
Partner Pay (FA080) is scanned to the customer's record (viewable in the
Documents icon), a Social Application (SOA) shell Work Item is
generated. This new claim activity contains no claim information apart
from the Customer Reference Number (CRN), personal details and receipt
date (date of claim).

-   Update claim information manually within the Work Item using
    information from the FA080 and associated documentation
-   Where a paper claim did not create a new claim activity, create a
    manual SOA shell via the Process Direct Landing page. See Process
    Direct navigation, common screens and functions for help with SOA
    shells

For customers overseas, claims are to be transferred to Families
International Claims (FIC) to be finalised.

Income support payment customers with a DAP nominated start date in the
past may incur an overpayment for any period they were receiving both an
income support payment and DAP. Processing staff should contact affected
customers and advise they can prevent an overpayment by choosing to
delay their nominated start date to date paid to + 1 of their income
support payment or another date in the future. Customers need to
consider their individual situation and should be advised that any
changes of circumstances, such as return to work or receiving paid
leave, may impact on their eligibility for DAP.

If it can be determined that continued eligibility for the income
support payment has been maintained, the customer will not need to
reapply for their income support payment following the end of the DAP
period.

DAP rate and deductions

DAP is paid at the national minimum wage rate for up to 2 weeks from the
customer's nominated start date, after the claim has been granted. For
more information, see Rate of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and
Partner Pay (DAP).

DAP is not subject to income management.

Tax deductions will be applied at a default rate of 15%. Customers may
choose to vary the tax rate between the rates of 0-50%. Tax is the only
allowable deduction from DAP.

DAP interaction with Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and other payments

For information about DAP interaction with PPL and other payments, see
Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

Customers could not receive JobKeeper Payment for the same period they
receive DAP. Customers needed to provide their start and end date for
their DAP period to their employer. Direct the customer to their
employer for any enquiries about JobKeeper Payment.

Customers cannot receive a COVID-19 Disaster Payment, Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment or a Disaster Recovery Allowance, if they receive DAP.
Some customers may be able to change their DAP start date to another
period if they can meet eligibility in a different period. DAP customers
have the option of moving their DAP period, see Change of circumstances
for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

The Resources page contains keyword explanations for DAP pre-birth
claims excluded from automation.

Contents

Information requests for FTB, PPL and DAP claims and Add Newborn
activities

Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test

Payability and delivery of Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Processing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP)

Rejection and not effective codes for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Related links

Change in circumstances for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Processing proof of a child's birth

Rate of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Straight through processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
