-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the initial processing procedure when a customer
lodges family assistance paperwork. This can include paper claims and
forms, documents to support an online or paper claim, and documents to
verify circumstances for ongoing payments.

Checking and scanning documentation

Thoroughly check all forms to ensure they have been completed correctly.
Upon receipt, forms and documents must be fully scanned on site and,
where appropriate, stored on site in scan batch. All original documents
must be returned to the customer. If on-site scanning is unavailable,
see Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD.

If any pages are removed so that the first page contains a barcode,
ensure that all pages are scanned and stored, including the back page.

Smart Centre staff who have received training in the last 12 months and
who have processed or are proficient in processing Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) claims may process these claims at first contact. Normal Records
Management Unit (RMU) procedures apply.

Before accepting claim forms for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) or Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS), ensure all supporting evidence is lodged with
the application. Claim responses will indicate what evidence is
required. If evidence is not provided, advise the customer the claim
will not be considered lodged until all required documentation is
provided.

Newborn Child Declaration (FA081)

The FA081 is issued to parents by hospitals or midwives after the birth
of a child. The back page of the form contains the Proof of Birth
declaration signed by the doctor or midwife. It also contains a serial
number that is recorded online by the customer and checked when
processing the claim.

The FA081 is lodged by parents as proof of a child's birth to support a
claim for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments, and
to enrol the child for Medicare. The FA081 is not a claim for payments.
Customers must lodge a separate online or paper claim to receive
payments for the child, unless they are FTB current for other children
and only claiming FTB for a newborn child. In this case a fully
completed FA081 can be used to reassess the FTB. Customers have various
options to provide their child's proof of birth.

If the FA081 is lodged in person or by post, the customer will need to
have lodged the entire completed form.

Verifying children's names and dates of birth (DOB)

There is a range of documents other than the FA081 that customers can
lodge to verify a child's name or to provide proof of birth.

Current income support (non-Parenting Payment) customers lodging FA081 or FA012

These customers may also visit a service centre in relation to a
previously lodged FA081 or Details of your child's care arrangements
(FA012) for which a scanned image is available.

-   If determination of care can be established, the customer is to be
    offered a transfer to Parenting Payment at first point of contact
-    If a care determination cannot be made at point of contact, usual
    claim processes apply

This does not apply if the customer or their partner is not in receipt
of income support.

Hospital has issued obsolete form or has no FA081/FA008 supplies

If an obsolete form has been issued to a customer by the hospital it
must be accepted. The customer will then be contacted to obtain any
further information required.

A Team Leader or Service Support Officer (SSO) must then contact the
hospital regarding FA081/FA008 supplies to discuss ordering a new supply
of stock and to arrange urgent delivery, if appropriate.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   Office Locator
-    forms
-    signature requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Parental
    Leave Pay (PPL) claims, and
-    what to do if the requirements have not been met.

Related links

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Checking the status of an early claim for family assistance and Parental
Leave scheme payments

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS)

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claims and forms

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Information requests for FTB, PPL, DAP and CCB lump sum claims

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Initial contact after the death of a dependent child

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Processing proof of a child's birth

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Searching for a customer on the system

The My Health Record system - Your Health

My Health Record - children/dependants

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
