-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

DAP information for customers with children born or entering care before
1 July 2023.

This document outlines Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims. DAP is paid
under the Paid Parental Leave scheme and aims to support dads or
partners caring for a newborn or adopted child. It is taxable and is
paid at the national minimum wage rate for up to 2 weeks. Services
Australia delivers DAP.

Early claims

An early claim is made before the child's birth or entry into care. They
allow for an initial assessment to be completed.

They must be lodged within the allowable early claim period and can be
assessed pending proof of birth or entry into care. Claims lodged
outside this period cannot be assessed.

Claim options

DAP is lodged as a standalone claim, not as part of a combined claim for
family assistance and/or Parental Leave Pay (PPL).

Customers can lodge DAP claims:

-   online or
-   if it is unreasonable for the customer to access online services,
    via the Claim for Dad and Partner Pay (FA080).

DAP claims must be lodged by the father or partner. Claims lodged by the
birth mother will be made not effective as they are not an eligible
person to claim DAP.

Transitional processing for DAP pre-birth claims

Customers can still submit a claim for DAP if their child's expected
date of birth or adoption is on or after 1 July 2023. However, Service
Officers should encourage customers to claim after their child is born
or enters their care.

If the customer submits a DAP pre-claim and the child's actual date of
birth or adoption is:

-   before 1 July 2023, the agency will assess the DAP claim once the
    customer gives proof of birth or entry to care
-   on or after 1 July 2023, the agency will reject the DAP claim once
    the customer gives proof of birth or entry to care. The rejection
    letter invites the customer to claim PPL

See Transitional reassessment of claims for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
pre-birth claims.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
the claim form.

Contents

Initial contact by customers claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Related links

Assessing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Processing proof of a child's birth

Change in circumstance for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP)

Payability and delivery of Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Rejection and not effective codes for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Reviews and appeals for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
