-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

DAP details for customers with children born or entering care before 1
July 2023 only.

This document outlines how fathers or partners can lodge a claim for
DAP. DAP is paid under the Paid Parental Leave scheme and aims to
support dads or partners caring for children born or adopted on or after
1 January 2013. Note: for children born or adopted on or after 1 July
2023, DAP will cease. The 2 weeks (10 payable days) will be rolled into
PPL.

Timeframe for claiming

Claims can be lodged up to 3 months (97 days) before the child's
expected date of birth or entrustment to care as part of the adoption
process.

Claims must be lodged within 52 weeks of the date of birth or entry into
care of the child.

How to claim

DAP claims must be lodged by the father or partner. Claims lodged by the
birth mother will be made not effective as they are not an eligible
person to claim DAP.

A separate procedure applies for checking eligibility for Dad and
Partner Pay (DAP).

[] Individuals can claim DAP online. This provides them with a
streamlined claim and is the preferred service offer.

If it is unreasonable for the customer to claim online, a Claim for Dad
and Partner Pay (FA080) can be issued. Note: a DAP claimant's partner
does not need to sign the claim form.

Nominees cannot lodge an online claim for a claimant. Correspondence
nominees are to be offered an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) to lodge a
claim for DAP on behalf of the claimant. If the nominee declines the
ACC, the paper-based Claim for Dad and Partner Pay form (FA080) must be
issued.

Claimants need to supply all required information to make an effective
DAP claim. Note: if proof of birth and birth registration have been
recorded on the child's record, the DAP claimant is not required to
provide it again.

Additional help with claiming may be available for remote Indigenous
customers.

Once a claim is assessed

The claimant will be sent a letter advising the outcome of their claim.

If an early claim is assessed as eligible pending proof of birth/entry
into care, the claimant will be sent a reminder to provide verification
of the child's date of birth or confirmation that the child has entered
their care.

If the child is part of an adoption or surrogacy arrangement and the
claimant is not a biological parent, evidence of the surrogacy
arrangement or adoption must be provided.

Note: the Newborn Child Declaration (FA081) will need to be completed by
the person claiming DAP if proof of birth and birth registration has not
been recorded on the child's record. See Processing proof of a child's
birth.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information about DAP and how to claim and a link to the FA080.

Related links

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Assessing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Processing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Processing proof of a child's birth

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Change in circumstances for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Rejection and not effective codes for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
