-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information about reviews and actioning appeals
for Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (child wellbeing).

Review and appeals for ACCS (child wellbeing)

As ACCS (child wellbeing) decisions impact the child care service and
the customer, both parties have a right of review and can appeal a
decision regarding an ACCS (child wellbeing) application.

If the customer or provider is not satisfied with the outcome of the
initial review, they can seek a review from an Authorised Review Officer
(ARO). If the service or customer believe the ARO decision is incorrect,
they can appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

Child care services

Services can email the ACCS (child wellbeing) appeal team to:

-   explain a rejected ACCS (child wellbeing) application
-   clarify the start date of a ACCS (child well being) application
-   access their review/appeal rights

Services need to provide their Service ID (1900 number) and the Document
ID of the application they would like information on. The mailbox will
try to provide a response within 10 working days.

To seek a review of an ACCS (child wellbeing) decision, services must
complete the Additional Child Care Subsidy - Request for Review form
(which they can obtain by emailing the ACCS review mailbox or a copy is
available on the Resources page).

Services must create a new application and upload the review request and
any supporting evidence to the new application. The dates may not match
the rejected determination application and Service Officers may need to
amend these when finalising their assessment. An application for review
must be made within 13 weeks of being notified of the original decision.

Favourable outcomes of reviews initiated by the service should be
treated as a reassessment and managed within the provider record in
Process Direct.

Unfavourable outcomes will also need to be recorded on the customer
record (in Customer Record) using the review and appeal script.

Customers

Customers who contact in regards to their ACCS (child wellbeing)
assessment should be referred back to their providers at first instance
to discuss any concerns they may have regarding the payment.

Information about ACCS (child wellbeing) customer entitlements can be
located on the customer record in Process Direct, Child Care icon under
the ACCS child wellbeing section.

If the customer has discussed their concerns with the provider and still
does not agree with the decision, a request for formal review can be
recorded on the customer record via the Internal Review/Explanation
Script. There is no requirement to record any detail on the provider
record where the customer is formally appealing.

ACCS Subject Matter Expert (SME) Role

A SME is an experienced offer who is independent of the original
decision, including decisions made by specialist officers. An ACCS SME
is responsible for explaining a decision as required by a customer for
ACCS payments. For further information on the SME role, see SME
explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, external websites
and templates.

Related links

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (child wellbeing)

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Exceptional Circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Processing Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (child wellbeing)
determinations

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
