-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Services Australia website

Parental Leave Pay

A guide to Australian Government payments - Family Assistance payment
rates

Entry hub

Paid Parental Leave scheme entry hub

Letter text

Q999 letter text for claims made not effective (NEF/CAM) - claim already
made, and the customer's initial claim has not been finalised. (Only for
children born before 1 July 2020)

'We are writing to you about your claim for Parental Leave Pay that you
lodged on <later claim date>. We cannot assess this claim as you
previously lodged a claim for Parental Leave Pay for the same child on
<initial claim date>.

You do not need to do anything regarding this letter. After we have
assessed your initial claim for Parental Leave Pay we will contact you
with a decision regarding your eligibility for this payment.'

Q999 letter text for claims that are made not effective (NEF/CAM) -
claim already made, and the customer's initial claim has been finalised.
(Only for children born before 1 July 2020)

'We are writing to you about your claim for Parental Leave Pay that you
lodged on <later claim date>. We cannot assess this claim as you
previously lodged a claim for Parental Leave Pay for the same child on
<initial claim date>.

You do not need to do anything regarding this letter. We contacted you
with the outcome of your claim for payment on <date initial letter
sent>.'

Q999 letter text for claims that cannot be made not effective (NEF/N97)
due to a system limitation.

'We are writing to you about your Parental Leave Pay claim. We cannot
assess the claim for your child because your claim has been lodged more
than 3 months before your child is expected to <be born/come into your
care>.

To be assessed for Parental Leave Pay, you will need to make a new claim
within 3 months of the date your child is expected <to be born/come into
your care>.'

For more information, see servicesaustralia.gov.au – Parental Leave Pay.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
