-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what to do if a member of a couple lodges a
family assistance and/or PPL claim and their partner is currently
receiving FTB.

Claiming FTB

Members of a couple cannot both receive FTB for the same period unless
they are a blended family or are claiming for a past period during which
they were separated.

If the partner of a primary carer claims FTB (for another child) and the
primary carer claims PPL, 2 separate claims will need to be lodged.

If the PPL, FTB or PPL/FTB combined claimant's partner is receiving FTB
and the family is not a blended family, the family should be contacted
to discuss their options:

-   The family may choose for the FTB current partner to cancel their
    FTB, and for the new PPL claimant to also claim family assistance
    for all children. The FTB current partner will need to contact the
    agency to cancel FTB from date paid to plus one day
-   If the family decide that it is best for the FTB current partner to
    claim FTB for the new child, the family assistance claim lodged by
    the PPL claimant can be rejected or withdrawn. If FTB claim is
    withdrawn or rejected, the PPL claim will still be assessed if all
    relevant information has been provided
-   If the PPL claimant has lodged a completed FA081 which has been
    signed by both the PPL claimant and the FTB current partner, the FTB
    can be reassessed to add the newborn child to the partner's current
    FTB
-   If the customer has lodged a completed FTB only claim which has been
    signed by both the claimant and the FTB current partner, the FTB can
    be reassessed to add the newborn child to the partner's current FTB
-   If the partner of a primary carer claims FTB (for another child) and
    the primary carer claims PPL, 2 separate claims will need to be
    lodged

All claims lodged must be determined unless they are withdrawn by the
PPL claimant or made not effective. If the claim is rejected, the PPL
claimant is to be issued with a letter advising them of the reason for
the rejection and their review and appeal rights

Claims lodged via Express Plus Families

[] The Express Plus Centrelink mobile app is not currently available to
customers claiming PPL if someone else is receiving FTB for the
child/ren. Customers in this situation are required to complete an
online or paper claim (and submit any other relevant supporting
documents.

Online claims

[] If a person uses their partner's online account to make a claim for
family assistance or PPL in their own name, this cannot be considered a
legal claim and must be made not effective immediately. For an online
claim to be effective it must be made by a person registered with their
own online account.

When a customer registers for self service, they agree to the Self
Service Conditions of Use. If they allow another person to use their PIN
or password, they are in breach of those conditions.

Where a claim has been processed, whether granted or not, on an
incorrect record, it is likely the record will be intertwined and it
must be referred to the Data Quality Unit for follow-up.

Smart Centre Processing staff should contact the customer registered
online to advise that they need to make a claim for family
assistance/PPL in their name and to remind them of the Self Service
Conditions of Use.

The Resources page contains information regarding a shared care system
problem. It also contains links to the Intertwined Referral Form, Smart
Centre (FCC) Branch homepage for the ICT Referral Request webform,
mySupport, Centrelink online services and Office Locator.

Related links

Online and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) for Family Assistance,
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalments for children in care other
than a newborn or adopted child

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Blended families and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Separated couples and eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a
period before separation

Information requests for FTB, PPL, DAP and CCB lump sum claims

Not effective, rejection, or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit
or Stillborn Baby Payment

Rejecting a family assistance claim

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
