-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines the transitional process for the reassessment of
claims for Parental Leave Pay pre-birth claim due to the implementation
of changes to Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for children born or adopted on
or after 1 July 2023.

PPL and DAP changes from 1 July 2023

The Paid Parental Leave scheme has changed. For children born or adopted
on or after 1 July 2023, Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner
Pay (DAP) combine into one payment. This means DAP ends on 1 July 2023.
For children born or adopted before 1 July 2023, previous eligibility
and payment rules for PPL and DAP still apply.

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023:

Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) will no longer be able to be claimed. The 2
weeks (10 payable days) are being rolled into PPL

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) will increase to 20 weeks (100 payable days)
entitlement

PPL will be fully flexible, meaning all 100 days are to be treated as
‘flexible’ PPL days where they can be accessed:

-   In a continuous block
-   Single days
-   Any combination of smaller continuous blocks and single days

Primary, secondary and tertiary claim types will be removed.

Birth mothers no longer need to claim PPL first, or at all, in order for
the other parent or partner to receive PPL. Either parent or their
partner can claim PPL first.

Approval to claim and approval to share days is required from the birth
mother when:

-   the partner of the birth mother claims
-   the other parent claims
-   the partner of the other parent claims

These approvals will be obtained via an online task

In cases of adoption, where there is:

-   one adoptive parent, they must give approval to claim and approval
    to share PPL days to any other claimant (that is, partner of the
    adoptive parent)
-   two adoptive parents, the first adoptive parent to claim must give
    approval to share PPL days to the other adoptive parent. They do not
    need to give approval to claim

A family income test will be introduced, in addition to the individual
income test. If the customer does not meet the individual income test
then the family income test limit is applied. This applies to both
single and partnered customers

A cap of 18 weeks/90 days will apply for customers who are partnered at
the date of claim. The remainder of the entitlement will be reserved on
a ‘use it or lose it’ basis for their partner, or the other parent.
Note: the birth mother is still required to provide approval to claim
and share the ‘reserved’ PPL days. If the partner/other parent is not
eligible, the 90 day cap still applies

Customers who are single at the date of claim can choose to share their
days with the other parent, or take all 100 days, no cap is applied

Customers no longer need to have ‘primary care’ of the child on their
PPL days, they just need to have ‘care’ of the child on the day they are
claiming. As more than one customer can have care of a child on a day,
multiple customers can claim PPL on the same day. There is a maximum of
10 concurrent dates per child. This means a maximum of 10 PPL days can
be taken by customers for the same child on the same day

Fathers and partners may be payable for PPL where the birth mother does
not meet the income test or residency test, or is serving a newly
arrived residents waiting period (NARWP)

The birth mother must still meet the work test even if the birth mother
is not claiming PPL for the child

Claims where an expected date of birth or date of adoption is on or
after 1 July 2023 can only be processed in Process Direct.

Transition arrangements

During the period 26 March 2023 to 30 June 2023 only birth mothers and
first adoptive parents were able to submit a PPL pre-birth claim for a
child whose expected date of birth or entry into care is on or after 1
July 2023.

All other claimants were prevented from lodging an online claim for PPL
and will be invited to claim on or after 1 July 2023.

If a a customer attempted to lodge a paper Claim for Parental Leave Pay
and Family Tax Benefit (FA100) see Table 3 in the Process page.

Under the new rules claimants will require approval to claim from the
birth mother or first adoptive parent to be able to submit their PPL
claim. Approval to share PPL days can be advised by the birth mother and
first adoptive parent from 1 July 2023.

Customers will still be able to submit a pre-birth claim for DAP if
their child’s expected date of birth or entry into care is on or after 1
July 2023. This is in case the child's actual date of birth or care is
before 1 July 2023. However customers will be advised in the online
claim that they may prefer to claim after their child is born or comes
into care instead.

Claiming PPL from 26 March 2023

The online claim for Parental Leave Pay will be updated to include new
questions and information from 26 March 2023.

If the child’s expected date of birth or adoption is:

-   on or after 1 July 2023, updated Parental Leave Pay questions will
    be presented and an early claim assessment of PPL under the new
    rules will be made
-   before 1 July 2023, existing Parental Leave Pay questions and
    information will be presented and an early claim assessment of PPL
    under the existing rules will be made

PPL claims will be reassessed (if required) under the relevant PPL
scheme once proof of birth or adoption is provided, for example, where
the child’s expected date of birth or entry into care is:

-   on or after 1 July 2023 and the actual date of birth or entry into
    care is before 1 July 2023
-   before 1 July 2023 and actual date of birth or entry into care is on
    or after 1 July 2023

The Resources page contains examples of how PPL reassessment will be
applied to PPL pre-birth claims where:

-   the child’s expected date of birth or entry into care was before 1
    July 2023, but
-   the child’s actual date of birth or entry into care is on or after 1
    July 2023

The paper claim for Parental Leave Pay (FA100) will be updated to
include new questions and information until 1 July 2023. If a customer
lodges a paper claim using an old claim form, they will need to be
contacted to provide more information required to assess their claim.

The Resources page contains links to the PPL entry hub and contact
details, and Q999 letter text.

Contents

Claiming and managing Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days for children born
or entering care on or after 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Paid Parental Leave (PPL) for children born or entering
care on or after 1 July 2023

Related links

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) customer, for a child born before 1 July 2023,
returns to work

Determining a customer’s Paid Parental Leave (PPL) period start date for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary
claimant for children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Processing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
