-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to code paper claims for Carer Payment (CP)
(child) where care receivers are aged under 16 years.

CP coding

The coding in this procedure covers paper claims for CP for one care
receiver or CP (combined) for 2 to 4 care receivers and CP where there
has been a change in care receiver.

Carer also claims CA (child) for care receiver

If the carer has claimed both CP (child) and CA (child), determine the
claim for CA (child) before CP (child).

If the carer is not eligible for CA (child), they may be eligible for CA
(auto) if CP (child) is granted. Coding a CP claim may automatically
assess eligibility for CA (auto).

If CA HCC only was granted and during the CP claim the DCLA score has
increased (such as via the Care Load Validation process), a manual
assessment of eligibility for CA auto or CA manual may be required.

One CP paper claim for multiple care receivers

If a carer lodges one claim for Carer Payment (CP) but has listed more
than one care receiver, determine who the carer is claiming for. For
example, if one SA404 and 2 SA407’s are lodged. The carer must be
contacted to discuss the following:

CP can be paid for:

-   one care receiver, or
-   combined care receivers

discuss the circumstances of the carer and care receivers

discuss the implications of the decision such as bereavement provisions

the carer must be the person to decide who they claim CP for when there
is more than one qualifying care receiver

The contact with the carer must be clearly documented on the carer's
record. If the carer cannot be contacted, a letter must be sent to the
carer requesting contact before the claim is finalised.

Multiple CP paper claims received

If a carer lodges multiple paper claims for CP for 2 or more care
receivers, determine who the carer is claiming for. For example, if 2 x
SA404’s and 2 x SA407’s are lodged. The carer must be contacted to
discuss the following:

CP can be paid for:

-   one care receiver, or
-   combined care receivers

discuss the circumstances of the carer and care receivers

discuss the implications of the decision such as bereavement provisions

the carer must be the person to decide who they claim CP for when there
is more than one qualifying care receiver

The contact with the carer must be clearly documented on the carer's
record. If the care cannot be contacted, a letter must be sent to the
carer requesting contact before the claim is finalised.

Note: if multiple CP claims are received, all claims must be finalised
such as rejection for one care receiver and grant for second care
receiver.

Grandfathering provisions

Carers who are current or suspended on 30 June 2010 and were:

-   granted CP (child) under the DCLAD (2009) or CA (child) under the
    Child Disability Assessment Determination (CDAD) (2001) will
    maintain qualification and payability under their existing
    provisions. This remains until they are selected for review under
    DCLAD 2020 or lose qualification on or after 1 July 2010. This group
    of care receivers will not appear on the Carer Payment Grandfathered
    (CRGF) screen
-   granted CP (child) due to caring for a Profoundly Disabled Child
    (PDC), or 2 children who require the equivalent care of a PDC, will
    maintain qualification and payability under PDC provisions until
    they are selected for review under DCLAD 2020 or lose qualification
    on or after 1 July 2010. Carers in this group who reclaim CP (child)
    for the same care receiver from 1 July 2010 to 17 August 2020 will
    be required to provide a DCLAD (2020) care load assessment and
    medical report. These groups of care receivers will appear on the
     CRGF  screen

DVA disability payment

If the carer is receiving a disability payment from the Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA), do not reject their claim based on income
before checking whether they may be entitled to receive Defence Force
Income Support Allowance (DFISA).

The system will be able to identify these customers if the claim is
correctly coded including DVA Disability payment details.

Care receiver income and asset details

The Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test for CP (child) is
administered in addition to the pension income and assets test. Claims
require the CRIA screen to be coded for each care receiver.

Some assets must be disregarded when applying the care receiver income
and assets test, including:

-   the family home
-   funds received from the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA)
    that are deposited into an account used to manage the care
    receiver's National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) plan, and
-   assets obtained to specifically assist the care receiver in respect
    of their disability

See Components of the Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test.

If the income is over the limit for the appropriate year, or the assets
are over the limit and the requirements for exemption from the care
receiver asset test are not met, the claim will automatically be
rejected and an automatic letter issued.

For when to issue a Carer Payment Income and assets details - child or
children being cared for - under 16 years (SA304(C)), and who should
complete this form, see Components of the Care Receiver Income and
Assets (CRIA) test.

Selective Application of Data

When information recorded in the New Claim activity needs to be
finalised on the customer's record before the New Claim activity can be,
the Selective Application of Data (SAD) can transfer certain tasks into
another activity to allow approval.

Carer has recently died after lodging a claim

Under some circumstances, claims lodged after the death of a customer
would also be assessed.

The Resources page contains

-   contact details for the Centrelink Payments Support Team (CPST), and
-   a table of scenarios when a medical report for a CP claim results in
    the cancellation of CA

Related links

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged under 16

Carer Payment (CP) (child) episodic care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for 2 to 4 children each with a
disability or medical condition (combined care)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for a disabled adult and 1 or 2
children with a disability or medical condition (multiple care)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) exchanged care

Carer Payment (CP) for 2 or more carers in respect of the same care
receiver

Carer Payment (CP) (child) short term care

Components of the Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test

Initial contact after someone has died

Selective Application of Data (SAD)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
