-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to help when processing the delivery
of ABSTUDY away from home allowances paid as boarding instalments to
schools and boarding institutions, including hostels and residential
colleges.

ABSTUDY boarding instalment payments

ABSTUDY secondary school students boarding at a school, in an approved
ABSTUDY Homestay arrangement, or at a hostel, which is a signatory to
the ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement must have their payments
delivered to the school or hostel.

ABSTUDY payments:

to boarding institutions are delivered via 2 boarding instalments each
school term

are delivered fortnightly in arrears to students who:

-   are in a private board arrangement, or
-   board at hostels not signatory to the ABSTUDY Standard Hostels
    Agreement

Payment on Advice (PoA) is the term used for the process that requires
schools and boarding institutions to advise Services Australia of the
commencement dates in a term for ABSTUDY away from home students in
order to receive the first ABSTUDY boarding instalment payment in a
school term. Payment of the second instalment in a term is automatic for
eligible students and does not use a Payment on Advice process.

PoA does not occur for students who board:

-   privately, or
-   at hostels not signatory to the ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement

See Payment of Away from Home rate for ABSTUDY.

Payment on Advice (PoA) request

A PoA request is sent to the school or boarding institution (based on
where the customer's payment is paid) in the second week of each school
term. The request contains a One Time Access Code (OTAC) for
schools/boarding institutions to log into the Education Institutions
eService (the eService), and provides term commencement dates for
ABSTUDY students. In the eService, schools/boarding institutions can
view:

-   each of their estimated ABSTUDY boarding instalment payments for the
    term for students, and
-   the delivery dates for these entitlements

A boarding student processed as eligible for away from home rate after
the production of the PoA request for the term (but prior to the default
pay date on the fourth Tuesday), will need to have their commencement
status checked manually with the school or boarding institution.

Intention of Payment on Advice

PoA is a debt prevention process that:

-   ensures accuracy of payment to schools and boarding institutions,
    and
-   reduces instances of overpayments

PoA is intended to be the process of delivering the payment. It is not
intended to be the:

-   actual assessment of away from home rate, or
-   coding of away from home rate

Upon receipt of advice from a school/boarding institution of student
commencement status, a reassessment of a student's eligibility or
entitlement may, however, need to be undertaken prior to the actual
release or cancellation of payment.

Group Deduction Notice

When each payment via instalment is issued, the school/boarding
institution will be advised of the payment via their regular Group
Deduction Notice (GDN). To view or reissue the GDN refer to Centrepay
Business interactions.

[] School/boarding institutions registered for online services will be
able to view their GDN online. For further information, see Centrepay
Business interactions.

The Resources page contains a copy of the OTAC letter a link to the
Education Institutions eService and PoA OTAC release dates.

Related links

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement

Calculating the commencement date of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Cessation of the ABSTUDY away from home rate

ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2)

Payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Payment to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
