-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for coding and managing travel
bookings, of Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) in the Process Direct Travel Management
Application (TMA).

All activity and information relating to FAA for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
PES, must be recorded within TMA.

Authorising Fares Allowance (FAA) in advance

ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES student and non-student travellers can request
their travel to be authorised in advance. Services Australia will assess
eligibility for ABSTUDY FAA and book qualifying travel arrangements
prior to the journey.

Claim assessment

The details of the journey for pre-booked travel must be entered into
TMA. Once lodged, the student and/or non-student traveller's travel
request will be assessed for eligibility and the outcome recorded in
TMA. A letter, where required, will be sent advising of the outcome of
their claim for FAA.

Timeframes - travel request reasons

The agency has agreed to provide approved travel requests to the Travel
Management Company (TMC) within the following timeframes which will
allow the TMC enough time to source travel providers and finalise
bookings, and provide travel itineraries for all travellers.

Bulk - School Vacation bulk request, 6 weeks before the travel date

Other - All other travel reasons, regardless of whether the booking is
for one or more travellers - 7 days before the travel date. This
includes:

-   start of year
-   end of year
-   special purpose
-   orientation
-   compassionate
-   away from base
-   mid year
-   school vacation add-ons, and
-   private boarders

Urgent - New travel requests assessed as urgent. That is, unforeseen or
exceptional circumstances before 7 days of travel

Amendments - As soon as possible

Cancellations - As soon as possible

The Resources page contains a table for ABSTUDY Booking Status values
and use, ABSTUDY Travel Authorisation - Booking Form templates, ABSTUDY
Travel Authorisation - Booking Form User Guide, ABSTUDY Travel Minimum
DOC standards, Quicksteps email templates and a link to Office Locator.

Related links

Travel Management Application (TMA)

Coding Fares Allowance (FAA) reimbursements and Away from Base
entitlements for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Away from Base assistance for ABSTUDY

Determining the appropriate travel destination for ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance (FAA)

Fares Allowance (FAA) authorised in advance of travel for ABSTUDY

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating reviewing and deleting documents (including Fast Notes and DOA
DOCs)

No show for ABSTUDY travel

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
