
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to escalate a Medicare enrolment enquiry. It
also details how to escalate a Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS)
enquiry.

An outline

A Service Officer must try to resolve a customer enquiry at first point
of contact by using all resources available before contacting Local Peer
Support (LPS).

All vulnerable customer enquiries must be processed at first point of
contact. Service Officers not skilled in this work type, must escalate
to LPS for help.

See the Process page for the steps a Service Officer must follow before
contacting LPS.

If Service Officers cannot resolve the enquiry, escalate to Medicare and
Aged Care - LPS.

LPS will give a:

-   verbal answer to verbal enquiries, or
-   request Service Officers to escalate the enquiry through PaNDA,
    include any investigations, notes and documents

Service Officers and HSDD Service Officers must not escalate any
enquiries to the Medicare Consumers Program Support team directly. Only
LPS have the delegation to do this.

Family and domestic violence - copy/transfer requests for child under 15

If:

a request is received and a customer is concerned about their immediate
wellbeing or safety

-   Service Officers are to contact LPS

LPS decide immediate attention is required

-   LPS must email Health Service Delivery Division for advice

Document verification

Identification documents need to be verified in the Document
Verification System (DVS) before processing enrolment applications.

The Process page contains details on how Face to Face (F2F) Service
Officers verify information.

Role of Medicare Consumer Program Support

The Medicare Consumers Program Support team is in place to help with
exceptional or out of the ordinary enrolment requests and enquiries.
This can include giving an accurate interpretation of eligibility
policies to help work out a customer's eligibility.

The advice we give takes into account all of the relevant legislative
and policy requirements and is used to assess the customer’s individual
circumstances. A final decision is then made that matches the policy
intent.

In most cases the Medicare Consumers Program Support team does not
contact the customer unless it is required.

The Resources page contains links to contact details and the Document
Verification System (DVS) request form.

Related links

Access VEVO (Visa Entitlement Verification Online) program

Australian citizens eligibility for Medicare

Tier 0 technical support - self-sufficiency

Manage Medicare scanning

Medicare - Eligibility - Your Health

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
