
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains procedures for Service Officers to follow when a
Medicare Claim form (MS014) is submitted incomplete or incorrect. Note:
a claim form is not required for electronic funds transfer (EFT)
Medicare claims made in person at a Service Centre.

Incomplete or incorrect details supplied on Medicare claim forms

Where a Medicare Claim form (MS014) is submitted and it is incomplete or
incorrect details have been supplied, Service Officers must adhere to
the policy and procedures detailed in this document.

A claim form is considered incomplete if:

-   claimant or patient cannot be uniquely identified and the Medicare
    number is missing or incorrect on the claim form
-   claimant details not provided
-   claimant signature is missing

A claim form is considered incorrect if:

-   patient is not enrolled on the Medicare number quoted
-   claimant signature provided is in wrong section

The Process page contains steps to follow when a Medicare form is
incomplete or incorrect

Contacting claimant to obtain necessary information

Where a Medicare claim form (MS014) is submitted and is either
incomplete or incorrect details have been supplied the Service Officer
needs to contact the claimant to process the claim. Service Officers
must attempt to contact the claimant at least once to get the necessary
information in order to process the claim.

The Process page provides situations where a claimant must be contacted
for incomplete or incorrect forms submitted.

If the claimant is unable to be contacted by phone, or the required
information is unable to be obtained, the claim must be sent back to the
claimant accompanied by the appropriate standard letter. Claimant
details such as their postal address, phone number, EFT details and
organ donor registration must be recorded before sending the claim back
to the claimant. Note: Service Officers must not update any details if
the claimant has not signed the Medicare claim form.

Service Officers must make sure that a copy of the MS014 form, invoice
and Standard Letter has been uploaded to the PaNDA work ID where they
have updated any information in Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) including adding a comment in the personal section under the
claimant in CDMS that they are returning the paperwork to the claimant.

The Resources page contains a link to the Standard Letter Templates
page.

Note: if at any time Service Officers are in doubt about the validity of
a claim being processed, they should escalate the matter to their
supervisor.

Afterhours Service Officers

If you are processing outside of customer contact hours (before 8am and
or after 8pm), see Handle incoming and outbound phone calls for Medicare
telephony

See System functionality of the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare and Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory
Maintenance System (CDMS) for Medicare

Previous card issue number quoted on claim form

Patient claims submitted for payment using a previously issued Medicare
card can only be processed if:

-   the name, date of birth and address details are an exact match to
    those contained on Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS)
-   a current Medicare card number has been issued within the last 12
    months
-   the claimant has paid the invoice in full

Note: claims quoting a previously issued Medicare number flagged as lost
or stolen are not to be paid.

See the 'Paying patient claims using a Medicare card with a previously
issued number' section in Patient claim requirements for payment of
Medicare benefits.

Claimant signature differs from claimant details

Where a claimant's signature differs from the claimant details, see the
'Signature requirements for Medicare claim forms (MS014)' section in
Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits.

Organ donor or overseas address on incomplete or incorrect forms

Organ donor registration completed

Where the organ donor registration section of MS014 form has been
completed on forms that are incomplete or contain incorrect details, the
registration must be actioned.

For instruction on how to process the registration, see Register new
organ donor.

Overseas address on claim form

For instruction on how to process claim forms with an overseas address,
see Cheque processing in Medicare.

The Resources page contains the Claimant Declaration text and links to
the VG4 form, the Medicare Claim form (MS014) and Standard Letter
Templates.

Related links

Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits

Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS)

System functionality of the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS)
for Medicare

Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

Handle incoming and outbound phone calls for Medicare telephony

Claim processing in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
