-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides details of the Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS).

Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS)

From 1 July 2022, the Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS) is an incentive paid
to eligible employers and Group Training Organisations. They must engage
a new or existing worker as an Australian Apprentice in priority
occupations that has a national skills shortage. These occupations are
listed on the Appendix A – Australian Apprenticeship Priority List.

The Australian Apprentice must be:

undertaking a qualification at either Certificate III, Certificate IV,
Diploma or Advanced Diploma level in a priority occupation listed on
Appendix A – Australian Apprenticeship Priority List, and

-   starting or re-starting their apprenticeship between 1 July 2022 and
    30 June 2024, or
-   re-starting their apprenticeship with their original employer
    between 1 July 2022 and 30 June 2024, where the break in training is
    greater than 6 months

Eligible employers may receive a wage subsidy of:

-   10 per cent of gross wages paid for the first and second years
    (equivalent to two periods of 365 days) of a Training Contract, to a
    maximum of $1500 per quarter ($6000 per individual year), and
-   5 per cent of gross wages paid for the third year (equivalent to a
    period of 365 days) of a Training Contract, to a maximum of $750 per
    quarter ($3000 for a year)

Note: 1 year is considered to be a 12-month period which consists of 365
days where the apprenticeship was active. For example, days the
apprenticeship was suspended, or cancelled do not count towards the 365
day period.

See the Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS) table on the Resources page and
Australian Apprenticeships Incentives Program – Program Guidelines on
the References page.

Claim periods

Employers claim PWS in arrears, 3 months from the later of:

-   1 July 2022, or
-   the commencement/recommencement date of the apprenticeship

The PWS does not have set claim periods start and end dates. Claim
periods are 3 months in duration, based on an individual apprentice’s
commencement date. Claims become payable when the employer reaches their
Effect Date. The Effect Date for PWS is the day after the claim period
(the wage period) ends.

If an apprenticeship is suspended or cancelled and the apprentice
returns to the same employer within a 12-month period, the
apprenticeship year is extended by the number of days of the suspension
or cancellation.

See the Claim period and effect date examples table on the Resources
page.

Claiming PWS

Employers receive notification from the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations (DEWR) when a PWS claim has been created for them to
review and submit in the Apprenticeship Data Management System (ADMS).
Claims for PWS are created on the day after the wage period ends (the
effect date).

For example, an apprentice commences in a priority occupation on 14 July
2022. The effect date for PWS would nominally be 14 October 2022.

Employers must:

-   provide evidence of wages paid to the apprentice or trainee to
    support their claim, and
-   if required submit evidence that training has commenced for the
    apprentice. Employers generally provide this evidence to support
    their first PWS claim

All PWS claims require wage evidence. Commencement of training evidence
is only required once. If the apprentice's workplace is in an exempt
state or territory there is no requirement to provide evidence.

See the Claim period and effect date examples table on the Resources
page.

Time limits for PWS claims

Employers have 12 months from Effect date to submit a claim for PWS. At
the end of the claiming period, claims not actioned by employers, will:

-   update from the claim status of Ready to Expired
-   not be able to claim for that claiming period

Employers will need contact their Australian Apprenticeship Support
Network (AASN) providers to discuss any expired claims.

See the Claim period and effect date examples table on the Resources
page.

Apprenticeship Data Management System (ADMS)

Employers use ADMS to lodge their PWS claims. Services Australia staff
use DEWR logons to access and verify evidence for PWS claims in ADMS.

Processing Arrangements

From 1 October 2022, Services Australia on behalf of the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR), will verify evidence for PWS
claims, for wages paid from 1 July 2022 onwards.

For staff roles and responsibilities, see Apprenticeship Wage Subsidies
(AWS).

The Resources page has details on the Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS) Claim
period and effect date examples.

Contents

Verifying evidence for Apprenticeship Wage Subsidy (AWS) claims

Employer enquiries about Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and
Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

Apprenticeships Data Management System (ADMS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
