
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on sole traders. A sole trader
business is owned by one person only. Although there is generally a
separate accounting structure, the business is not a legal entity. A
person who is a sole trader directly owns the assets of a business and
is exclusively entitled to all of the profits made by the business. A
sole trader is also responsible for all of the debts of the business.

Examples of sole trader businesses

Many small businesses are owned and operated by one person as a sole
trader. Larger businesses often initially commence operations in this
manner.

Examples of sole trader businesses are cleaners, gardeners, home
handymen and other self-employed subcontractors.

The business may be run in the owner's name or under a registered
business name for example, J Bloggs trading as 'Brite-up Cleaning
Services'.

Sole trader income and assets assessment under the Social Security Act 1991

For payments made under the Social Security Act 1991, the income from a
sole trader business is the net income amount derived from the business
operations.

The assets of a sole trader business are assessable assets of the owner.
The amount to be taken into account for assets test purposes is the
current market value of the assets, less the business liabilities
(debts) listed on the business' balance sheet.

Sole trader business ceases

If a sole trader business has ceased to operate it is necessary to
establish the circumstances why the business activity has ceased.

For example, is the closedown due to a change in the circumstances of
the business, such as the loss of a major contract or major downturn in
the industry, or is it a part of the normal seasonal cycle of activity
applicable to the business?

Such factors will have a significant influence on the income and assets
test assessment of the business.

See Business has ceased or has been sold.

Self-employed or an employee

Although a customer may run a business there can be situations in which
the customer is working as an employee and is not self-employed.

For example, a contractor can be determined to be self-employed or an
employee depending on their circumstances.

Consider all factors when determining self-employment. If a customer
receives group certificates they will generally be considered an
employee.

Contents

How to identify a sole trader

Documents required to assess a sole trader business

Completing the Business details MOD F

Assessing and coding the Business details for sole traders and
partnerships MOD F

Assessing sole trader income

Assessing sole trader assets

Commission sales persons considered as self-employed

Income for an independent contractor and commission income

Related links

Share traders

Financial Investments

Factors to determine self-employment

Primary production aggregation for sole traders

Business has ceased or has been sold

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
