-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) closed from 1 January
2004. Since December 2005 all outstanding Financial Supplement Loans
(FSL) have been transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
recovery.

This document outlines information on what happens to a Financial
Supplement Loan (FSL) that has been transferred to the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO) if the student dies.

Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) was a voluntary loan
scheme which gave eligible tertiary students the option of borrowing
money to help cover their expenses while they studied.

The term 'Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)' refers to the
programme name of the Scheme. 'Financial Supplement loan (FSL)' is the
product of the Scheme (that is, students applied for the product (FSL)
and received this through the programme (SFSS)).

Funds for SFSS

The funds for FSL were provided by the Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(CBA). When the student applied for FSL, the student entered into a loan
contract with the CBA for a contract period. All loans were administered
by Centrelink (now Services Australia) until the end of the contract
period. At the end of the contract period, the outstanding loan was
transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). The loan then
became a debt to the Commonwealth and is repayable through the taxation
system.

Death of a student with an outstanding SFSS loan

If a student with an outstanding SFSS loan dies, the ATO must be
notified of the death of the student. It is important to refer the
enquiring party to the ATO to notify of the death of the student so that
any remaining FSL debt may be discharged. The only FSL debt that the
estate will be liable for is where a tax assessment has been issued up
to and including the date of death (that is, if a tax return has already
been assessed as requiring a compulsory FSL repayment). The compulsory
repayment amount would transfer to the estate for recovery and any
remaining FSL debt will be written off.

Customers can visit the ATO website for more information.

Note: the final balance on all outstanding loans will show as zero on
the Services Australia system. This does not mean that the loan has been
zeroed off, just that the balance has now been transferred to the ATO
for recovery through the taxation system.

The Resources page contains contact details for the ATO.

Related links

Death of a student

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
