-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the information a customer in receipt of
Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) must provide when they and/or their
partner commence or return to work, the effect their employment will
have on their payment, and additional assistance that may be available.

Reporting requirements

PPP customers and/or their partner who are commencing or returning to
full-time, part-time or casual work must notify within 14 days to avoid
being paid an incorrect amount.

The customer must be placed on statement reporting to ensure they are
paid the correct rate of PPP, where the customer and/or their partner
has commenced employment.

If the customer's partner reports using their online account or the
Express Plus Centrelink mobile app, the customer must ensure their own
employment income is included in their partner's report. The partner
will be returned to two weekly reporting if currently reporting less
frequently.

A customer with employment income must be directed to the Services
Australia website for more information about income and reporting. The
priority reporting line and the self service options for reporting must
be discussed.

Reporting requirements must be manually recorded if the customer and/or
their partner has employment income.

Self-service

[]PPP customers who have commenced or returned to work, or have ceased
employment are able to update their employment status through their
Centrelink online account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile app. This
will automatically place them onto or turn off two weekly reporting
requirement.

Eligible customers can also update their partner's employment status
when partner:

-   does not receive an income support payment
-   who receives an income support payment other than Disability Support
    Pension has given customer permission to enquire
-   receives Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension (Blind)
    with Rent Assistance

Return to work incentives

Customers can accrue Working Credits during fortnights of little or no
income and then use their Working Credit balance to increase the gross
amount they can be paid before PPP begins to reduce.

Once Working Credits are depleted, customers can be paid gross
employment income up to their income free area before their payments
start to reduce under the income test.

Assistance can continue during an employment income nil rate period,
including Family Tax Benefit (FTB), a Health Care Card (HCC)/Pensioner
Concession Card (PCC), and Telephone Allowance.

Cancellation of payments

The customer can request immediate cancellation of their income support
payment at any time.

Documenting details of employment income

All details of employment income - itemised weekly wage amounts,
calculations, and anything else concerning the advice must be documented
in full.

Full-time Australian Apprentice

Full-time Australian Apprentices may be eligible for ABSTUDY, Austudy or
Youth Allowance. This may be a more advantageous payment for the
customer as the student income and asset tests apply.

Family assistance

Check if the customer needs to revise their annual income estimate
and/or payment choice for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Child Care Subsidy
(CCS) to reduce the risk of an overpayment during the reconciliation
process.

Parents must also advise a return to work after a period caring for a
child to check their entitlement to the FTB Part B quarantine.

Work/training/study test details may need to be updated for the CCS
eligible hour limit.

Related links

Recording and correcting employment income details

Cancellation of payments

Determining the Date of Event for employment income

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Activity Test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Employment income nil rate period

Factors to determine self-employment

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) income and assets tests

ParentsNext appointments and processing

Recording return to work details and explaining eligibility for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine

Reporting overview

Sole traders

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Working Credit

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
