
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding customers commencing or
returning to work and the effect on Services Australia's payments. The
procedures contained within this topic provide specific information
according to the payment the customer is receiving.

Notification requirements

When a customer is a notification reporter and starts work, whether
full-time, part time, casual, on-call, etc, they must advise Services
Australia within 14 days .They can also advise up to 30 days before
being paid by their employer. Notification reporters will be
automatically changed to 2 weekly statement reporters when:

-   they commence work with an employer who reports income via Single
    Touch payroll (STP), and
-   the STP data is received from the employer

When a customer is a statement reporter and starts work, whether full
time, part-time, casual, on-call, etc, they must advise on their
Entitlement Period End Day (EPED) of any paid employment income. They
may advise in advance that they will be starting work but must still
report their paid gross employment income on their reporting day.

If a customer has worked but not yet been paid, they must report the
hours they worked in their reporting period, but are not required to
report any employment income until this is paid.

Service Officers must ensure they discuss the importance of reporting
correctly during this contact.

Self-Managed Services

Promote the use of self service to update employment status online,
report employment income and assist eligible customers to register and
navigate the tools. Support customers to check, confirm or change
employment income data displayed via Single Touch Payroll (STP). Where
there has been a self service failure, resolve the issue wherever
possible and encourage customers to reconnect to their desired self
service channel.

Employment information required

When advising commencement of (or returning to) work, the customer must
provide information about their employment circumstances. On
commencement of employment, a customer may be eligible for Special
Employment Advance (SEA).

Effect of employment income on payment

Any employment income a customer is paid may affect their payments under
the appropriate Income Test. When the customer has employment income:

-   and is under Age Pension age - Working Credits or Income Bank may
    enable the customer to keep some of their income support payment
    while they are working
-   and is over Age Pension age - and in receipt of a pension (excluding
    Parenting Payment Single) they may be entitled to the Work Bonus.
    Note: the Work Bonus is not used in the customer's transitional
    rules calculation, however the Work Bonus will still be used in the
    comparison calculations and partners may still benefit by the
    reduction in total income
-   that reduces their fortnightly rate to nil, the customer's payment
    may remain current at nil rate for up to six fortnights and they may
    retain certain benefits as long as they still remain qualified for
    the income support payment
-   and is under the age of 25, in receipt of Youth Allowance (YA) (job
    seeker) or JobSeeker Payment (JSP), and placed in employment by
    their Workforce Australia provider, they may be eligible for the
    Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) initiative. At either the completion
    of the employment income nil rate period or if they cease to qualify
    for YA (other) or JSP for an employment related reason, the YBWS
    customer will commence a 26 week suspension period

Australian Apprentice (apprentice or trainee)

ABSTUDY, Austudy or YA is payable to customers who meet the definition
of an Australian Apprentice (apprentice or trainee). If the customer is
returning to work as a full-time Australian Apprentice consider
entitlements to these payments if their current income support payment
will be cancelled or if it is to their financial advantage to change
income support payments. Customers receiving ABSTUDY, Austudy or YA as
an Australian Apprentice are subject to the same income and assets tests
that apply to students.

Two weekly reporting

If the customer or customer's partner is in receipt of an allowance and
is on variable reporting they will be returned to two weekly reporting
when they commence employment.

Notification reporters will be automatically changed to 2 weekly
statement reporters when:

-   they commence work with an employer who reports income via Single
    Touch payroll (STP), and
-   the STP data is received from the employer

All customers are required to report 2 weekly if they, and/or their
partner, have employment income and an exception does not apply. See
Recording and correcting employment income details.

Keeping records of employment

It is advisable customers keep their own records of the hours worked and
employment income paid during their entitlement period so their payment
is not delayed while waiting for payslips from the employer. Employment
income worksheets are available to help customers calculate and report
the right details to the agency.

Cancelling payments

Before cancelling a customer's payment, care must be taken to establish
the customer no longer meets the qualification and/or payability
provisions for their current income support payment. Any entitlement to
Working Credit, Income Bank or the Work Bonus may enable the customer to
keep some of their income support payment while they are working. If the
customer's income reduces their fortnightly rate to nil and some of that
income is from employment, the customer may remain current at nil rate
for up to six fortnights and retain certain benefits. If the customer is
in receipt of a 'grandfathered' payment, the differences in current
status and possible future entitlement must be explained.

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

If the customer is not qualified for payment and the decision is to
cancel payments, a letter must be sent to the customer with the
cancellation reason and their review and appeal rights.

New claims and return to work

Where the customer has lodged a claim for payment and advises they have
returned to work and been paid employment income, if there is no
entitlement to the payment the claim must be rejected

Note: employment details are automatically pre-filled in new claims when
data is available from Single Touch Payroll STP employers.

Change of contact details

Every customer's address (including postal address) and telephone
details (including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every
contact, and updated if required. Note: if the customer has
authenticated themselves via Self Service (phone), address details do
not need to be confirmed.

Family assistance

If the customer or partner receives Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Child
Care Subsidy (CCS), check if the customer needs to revise their current
family assistance income estimate and advise the customer of the choices
available to help reduce the chance of an overpayment during the
reconciliation process.

Customers whose employer reports income via Single Touch Payroll (STP)
may be contacted by Services Australia to update their current annual
income estimate when it does not align with their projected STP annual
estimate.

In general, customers who advise they have ongoing full-time work under
casual conditions must not be treated as 'casual' if the work is likely
to continue for more than 12 weeks. Parents must also advise a return to
work after a period caring for a child to check their entitlement to the
FTB Part B quarantine.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

PPL customers claiming for a child born or adopted on or after 1 July
2023 are able to return to work without losing eligibility.

To be paid a PPL day, a customer cannot be performing more than one hour
of paid work on this day. The customer can be receiving paid leave.

Permissible purpose provisions, including Keeping In Touch provisions,
do not apply.

See Claiming and managing Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days for children
born or entering care on or after 1 July 2023.

PPL customers claiming for a child born or adopted before 1 July 2023,
who return to work during their PPL period will lose their remaining PPL
period entitlement unless:

-   they return to work for a permissible purpose, or
-   an allowable exception reason applies

See Parental Leave Pay (PPL) customer, for a child born before 1 July
2023, returns to work.

If they return to work before the end of the PPL period the PPL period
will end. The customer may still be eligible for up to 30 Flexible PPL
days

PPL claimants returning to work before the end of their PPL period can
transfer any unused PPL to an eligible secondary or tertiary claimant.

Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Note: DAP is not payable for children born or adopted on or after 1 July
2023. Fathers and partners will need to claim PPL if their child is born
or adopted on or after 1 July 2023.

Customers are not entitled to DAP if they work or receive paid leave
during their DAP period unless:

-   an allowable exception reason applies, or
-   they are working for a permissible purpose

See Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

Where the customer notifies they are, or will be, working or receiving
paid leave (other than for an exception reason or permissible purpose)
during their DAP period, see Change in circumstances for Dad and Partner
Pay (DAP).

Employment is expected to last more than 12 weeks

If a customer returns to full time ongoing employment that is expected
to last more than 12 weeks, the employment status field is to be coded
to 'full time ongoing'. This will allow correct reassessment of the
customer's entitlement to income support taking into account any working
credits.

Customer declines to advise details of employment

If the customer is a job seeker and declines to advise details of
employment income, code the appropriate screen to cancel their income
support payment from the date last paid plus one day.

If a customer who is not a job seeker declines to advise details of
employment income, payment must be manually cancelled from date paid to
plus one day.

Details of employment income

All details of employment income including the gross amount paid and
other relevant information must be clearly documented.

The Resources page contains a list of special conditions which apply
specifically to various payments and links to the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO), Treasury and Services Australia websites.

Contents

Carer Payment (CP) carer undertakes paid employment, self-employment,
voluntary work, education or training activities

Commencing or returning to work for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth
Allowance (job seeker)

Commencing or returning to work for Austudy and Youth Allowance
(Students)

Commencing or returning to work for ABSTUDY

Commencing or returning to work Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Parenting Payment
Partnered (PPP)

Commencement of full-time work for Assistance for Isolated Children
(AIC) Scheme students

Commencing or returning to full-time work for parents/guardians of
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme students

Partner commencing or returning to work

Commencing or returning to work for Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES), ABSTUDY PES and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES

Commencing or returning to work Special Benefit (SpB)

Commencing or returning to work Age Pension

Commencing or returning to work for Carer Allowance

Commencing or returning to work for partners of ABSTUDY customers

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Parenting Payment
Single (PPS)

Commencing or returning to full-time work for parents/guardians of
ABSTUDY customers

Recording return to work details and explaining eligibility for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine

Existing customer starts an Australian Apprenticeship

Customer no longer an Australian Apprentice

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) customer, for a child born before 1 July 2023,
returns to work

Cessation of employment income

Related links

Customer ceases work or reduces hours of employment within the two year
suspension period for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Special Employment Advance (SEA)

The Working Credit Initiative

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Employment income nil rate period

Recording and correcting employment income details

Rejecting a claim for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA)
(job seeker)

Determining the Date of Event for employment income

Commencing or returning to self-employment Disability Support Pension
(DSP)

Commencing or returning to self-employment JobSeeker Payment, Youth
Allowance and Austudy

Ceasing, commencing or returning to self-employment (CLK)

Claiming ABSTUDY

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Identifying the most beneficial payment for trainees or Australian
Apprentices

Pension income and assets tests

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Change in circumstances for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

Troubleshooting Centrelink self service

Reporting employment income self service troubleshooting

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
