-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The document explains the compulsory mutual obligation requirements for
job seekers who are the principal carer of a dependent child.
Requirements for these customers vary according to the type of payment
they receive, and the age of the youngest child.

Temporary exemptions from mutual obligation requirements

A temporary exemption from mutual obligation requirements may be
appropriate, depending on the job seeker's circumstances. Some
exemptions apply only to principal carers.

Participation requirements removed for ParentsNext

From 5 May 2023, ParentsNext participants are no longer subject to
compulsory participation requirements. This means customers eligible for
ParentsNext can choose to participate in the program and will not be
financially penalised if they do not:

-   attend appointments with their provider or
-   sign a participation plan

Principal carers receiving Parenting Payment (PP)

-   Single PP customers are subject to compulsory mutual obligation
    requirements from the date their youngest dependent child turns 6
    years of age. Single PP customers cease to qualify for PP once their
    youngest child turns 14 years of age and they must apply for another
    suitable payment as a principal carer
-   Partnered PP customers will cease to qualify for PP once their
    youngest child turns 6 years of age and they must apply for another
    suitable payment as a principal carer

PP job seekers who are not subject to mutual obligation requirements may
volunteer to participate with an Employment Services Provider. See
Eligibility to access employment assistance services through Workforce
Australia for more information on referrals.

Principal carers receiving JSP, YA job seeker or SpB

Principal carers receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA)
job seeker or Special Benefit (SpB) are subject to compulsory mutual
obligation requirements regardless of the age of their youngest child.
However, principal carers in receipt of SpB who have a dependent child
under the age of 6 can be granted an exemption from their mutual
obligation requirements. These job seekers should be advised of possible
entitlement to PP depending on the age of their youngest child and
mutual obligation requirements for PP that commence once their youngest
child turns 6.

Community Development Program (CDP)

Job seekers who live in a Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations designated remote area are referred to the CDP.

CDP Provider managed job seekers will negotiate their Job Plan with the
CDP Provider in their region.

A Job Plan will be negotiated by Services Australia for:

-   job seekers with mutual obligation requirements who are fully
    meeting their requirements and are not required to be connected with
    a CDP Provider
-   job seekers who are Centrelink managed and choose to volunteer with
    a CDP Provider. These job seekers will remain Centrelink managed

Compulsory Participation Interviews

It is compulsory for single PP job seekers to enter into a Job Plan when
their youngest child turns 6 years of age. Customers with mutual
obligation requirements will be contacted and an interview will be
arranged to discuss mutual obligation requirements.

Job Plan required for all principal carers

All job seekers with mutual obligation requirements must enter into a
Job Plan with either Services Australia or their provider (if they are
provider managed).

[] Job Plans may be negotiated by Service Officers over the phone and
submitted for online agreement, or negotiated in person. This will
normally apply to Centrelink managed job seekers.

Online agreement of Job Plans is available for job seekers who have an
Online Account and they will view and agree to their Job Plan online.
Online agreement supports the process of negotiating Job Plans via the
phone, rather than in person, and at either new claim or a subsequent
Job Plan negotiation.

Principal carers have 'part-time' mutual obligation requirements

Principal carers on PPS, JSP or YA (job seeker) have 'part-time' mutual
obligation requirements. 'Part-time' refers to the ways in which their
requirements vary from other job seekers, and the extra flexibilities
they are allowed, in recognition of their family care responsibilities.

This is different from the reduced requirements that apply to job
seekers with an assessed partial capacity to work or temporary reduced
work capacity. These job seekers have variations in their requirements
on the basis of medical evidence of their reduced capacity to work.

'Part-time' requirements for principal carers essentially means:

-   Activities, appointments and other requirements should be scheduled
    to occur during school hours only (generally between 9 am and 3 pm
    during school terms), unless otherwise requested or agreed to by the
    principal carer. This includes participation in employment services
    and activities negotiated by providers
-   Principal carers with job search requirements must be actively
    looking for work of 15 hours per week. A principal carer may accept
    a job offer of more than 15 hours per week but cannot be compelled
    to do so. See Suitable/unsuitable work for more details
-   There are a range of other 'unsuitable work' factors that apply only
    to principal carer parents, including access to appropriate
    childcare, different travel time and travel cost rules, and a
    financial suitability test to be applied to the job in question
-   Principal carers can fully meet their requirements through paid
    work, approved study, or a combination of these activities for at
    least 15 hours per week (or 30 hours per fortnight). This means they
    will be Centrelink managed, and not required to participate in
    employment services or undertake any job search activities

Although the '15 hour' rule is a common theme for job seekers with
part-time mutual obligation requirements, it is not a maximum number of
activity hours that applies to these job seekers. There are some
circumstances where providers can negotiate higher hours with the
agreement of the job seeker. For example, where the principal carer
agrees to participation in short, intensive, or non-vocational
activities/programmes to meet their requirements. Providers follow
guidelines on how to set suitable activities and hours for different
types of job seekers. These guidelines are set by the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations (and the Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet for CDP Providers).

Principal carer activities to meet requirements

Principal carers will generally meet their mutual obligation
requirements in several ways:

-   Through looking for suitable part-time paid work of at least 30
    hours per fortnight
-   Undertaking the activities negotiated with their Employment Services
    Provider

A principal carer can fully satisfy their mutual obligation requirements
by undertaking:

sufficient paid work or self-employment of at least 30 hours per
fortnight with employment income, or net business income, at the
national minimum wage or above

approved study of 15 hours per week or 30 hours per fortnight, inclusive
of contact and/or non-contact hours. Note: different requirements apply
for approving study. See:

-   Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
    Payment (JSP)
-   Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for Parenting
    Payment (PP)
-   Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for Youth
    Allowance (YA), or
-   Mutual obligation requirements for Special Benefit (SpB)

a combination of paid work and study or self-employment and study is at
least 15 hours per week (30 hours per fortnight)

Small Business Training (as part of Self-Employment Assistance) of at
least 15 hours per week

Small Business Coaching (as part of Self-Employment Assistance)

Voluntary work

If aged 55 to 59 years inclusive, who is a principal carer (job seeker)
may choose to undertake voluntary work or a combination of voluntary
work and paid work or self-employment of at least 30 hours per fortnight
and the employment income, or net business income, must be at the
national minimum wage or above.

Job seekers aged 55 to 59 and who are within the first 12 months of
receipt of their current income support payment (including suspension
periods of up to 3 months) have a minimum requirement of 15 hours per
fortnight of paid work or self-employment as part of their combination
of approved voluntary work and suitable paid work.

After receiving their current income support payment for a 12 month
period or upon turning 60 years of age, these job seekers may fully
satisfy their requirements by undertaking 30 hours or more per fortnight
of any combination of approved unpaid voluntary work and suitable paid
work/self-employment, including solely through approved unpaid voluntary
work.

If aged 60+, a principal carer may choose to undertake voluntary work or
a combination of voluntary work and paid work or self-employment of at
least 30 hours per fortnight and the employment income, or net business
income, must be at the national minimum wage or above.

Additionally, a principal carer who is under 55 years of age can have
voluntary work approved by their provider, under limited circumstances.
In this situation, the provider will complete all necessary checks and
approvals of the voluntary work placement and the organisation -
Services Australia has no role in these approvals. The job seeker will
remain provider managed.

Ministers of Religion

Ministers of Religion who are either a principal carer parent or a
person assessed as having a partial capacity to work, can meet their
mutual obligation requirements by undertaking at least 30 hours of paid
pastoral work a fortnight for their religious organisation. The amount
of remuneration received does not have to be at the national minimum
wage.

They will be required to provide evidence on an annual basis, such as a
letter from their religious organisation, confirming that they are
working at least 30 paid hours per fortnight as a Minister for a
religious organisation to continue to be assessed as meeting their
mutual obligation requirements.

Principal carer income

Income provided by a partner to a member of a couple who is in receipt
of a social security payment, does not meet the definition of income
under section 8(8) of the Social Security Act (1991). For example, a
principal carer being paid by their current partner to provide child
care for just their own children would not be regarded as meeting
requirements. However, a principal carer who engages in a viable family
day care business and cares for other children in addition to their own,
may have this activity assessed for meeting their mutual obligation
requirements. Similarly, a job seeker who undertakes employment and
derives income from a business where their partner is involved in that
business, may have this income included and the activity assessed for
mutual obligation requirements.

Requirement to register with an Employment Services Provider

Principal carers who are meeting their mutual obligation requirements by
undertaking suitable paid work, including self-employment, studying for
at least 30 hours per fortnight or a combination of these activities do
not have to be referred to an Employment Services Provider. A Job Seeker
Registration Only (JSRO)/No RJCP Referral Required (NRRR) registration
may be completed for the job seekers. They can however choose to
participate on a voluntary basis with an Employment Services Provider.
They will be registered as a Fully Eligible Participant (FEP)/RJCP Fully
Eligible (RFE) and linked to an Employment Services Provider.

If their income from paid work or net business income from
self-employment is less than the national minimum wage amount,
participation requirements will not be fully satisfied and referral to a
provider will be mandatory.

Mature aged principal carers who are meeting their mutual obligation
requirements through 30 hours per fortnight of approved voluntary work,
or a combination of approved voluntary work and paid work must remain
connected to their appropriate Employment Services Provider. Job seekers
connected with an Employment Services Provider, the must remain
registered as a FEP, however the provider may choose to suspend them for
the duration of the Approved Activity. They must accept suitable offers
of paid work between 15 and 25 hours a week (30 and 50 hours a
fortnight). If connected with a CDP Provider, the job seeker must remain
RFE.

Overseas absence

If a PP job seeker with compulsory mutual obligation requirements
travels outside Australia, they will be automatically granted an
exemption from their mutual obligation requirements for the period they
are payable outside Australia. The exemption will be automatically
recorded when the departure from Australia is recorded.

Business operating at a loss or below the minimum award wage due to claiming tax deductions

Principal carer job seekers, who are engaged in self-employment, will be
able to satisfy their mutual obligation requirements if they are working
in the business for at least 30 hours per fortnight and their net
business income is equivalent to at least 30 hours per fortnight at the
national minimum wage.

The situation may arise where the job seeker has a viable and ongoing
business; however it is operating at a loss or below the national
minimum wage due to significant tax deductions. In these circumstances,
the income must be assessed as not meeting the job seeker's mutual
obligation requirements of 30 hours per fortnight, when calculated
against the national minimum wage. The job seeker will not be considered
to have satisfied their mutual obligation requirements. Principal carers
who cannot fully meet their mutual obligation requirements must be
referred to an Employment Services Provider who is responsible for
determining appropriate activities to include in a Job Plan. This will
normally be job search.

Any gross income and allowable deductions that relate to the business
must be taken into account when assessing business income. The processes
surrounding the treatment of self-employment have not changed and should
not be altered for the purposes of mutual obligation requirements. See:

-   Self-employment as an approved activity and
-   Assessing sole trader income

Mutual obligation requirements for job seekers who fit into several categories

When job seekers with mutual obligation requirements fit into more than
1 of the following categories:

-   JSP mature age 55 + job seekers
-   job seekers with a partial capacity to work
-   job seekers with a temporary reduced work capacity
-   principal carers

The system will determine the participation category which is the most
beneficial to the job seeker.

An example of this is a job seeker receiving JSP who is a mature age
55 + job seeker with the full-time care of a child aged 14. The job
seeker fits into the mature age 55 + and the principal carer
participation categories. The job seeker will be placed into the
principal carer participation category.

The Resources page contains examples of how a principal carer can meet
their mutual obligation requirements with suitable work or during
periods of paid leave.

Contents

Voluntary participation for the principal carer of a dependent child

Conducting a Parenting Payment Single (PPS) Compulsory Participation
Interview

Challenges faced by parents

Exempting job seekers from their mutual obligation requirements due to
caring responsibilities

Changes in circumstances and the effect on participation for the
principal carer of a dependent child

Transfers to Parenting Payment (PP) and effect on participation

Related links

Principal carer of a dependent child

Helping parents return to work

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS)

Approved activities for principal carers

Suitable/unsuitable work

Mutual obligation requirements

Mutual obligation requirement exemptions

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements when going
overseas

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Principal carer of a dependent child fails to attend compulsory
participation interview

The principal carer of a dependent child is unable to meet their agreed
activities

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Shared care for social security payments

Self-employment as an approved activity

Assessing sole trader income

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
