-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines exemptions from Income Management under the
Disengaged Youth and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipient measures for
customers with dependent children.

Exemption from Income Management

Parents/principal carers of school age children or younger, who may be
income managed under the Disengaged Youth (DEY) or Long-term Welfare
Payment Recipient (LTWPR) measures, may seek an exemption from Income
Management by demonstrating that:

-   The parent/principal carer has not had any indicators of financial
    vulnerability over the preceding twelve month period, identified as
    part of the assessment process, and
-   Each of their dependent children are engaged in appropriate
    activities

Both parents/principal carers are income managed

Where both parents/principal carers of a dependent child/ren are income
managed, only one customer can apply for an exemption under the parental
exemption category. Only a designated principal carer may apply for a
responsible parenting category exemption.

Evidence for exemption applications

Customers have 28 days from the day they lodge an exemption application
to lodge any supporting evidence.

Evidence a customer is required to provide will not change during the 28
day assessment period, if a child changes category during this time.
This also applies for a child who enters or leaves care during this
pending application period.

Role of Service Officers

Service Officers assisting customers who are income managed or who have
become eligible for Income Management must advise customers of the
options available to apply for an exemption from Income Management.

Service Officers should first ask the customer why they wish to apply
for an exemption. It might be the customer does not fully understand
Income Management and the service officer can help at first contact by
advising what income management is and how the customer can fully
benefit from it such as paying bills and other priority services. If the
customer still wishes to proceed with an exemption request, provide
information about the activities and evidence that would be required for
the customer to be granted an exemption. This information should include
details about the activities and evidence required for each of the
customer's dependent children based on the child's age and
circumstances.

Service officers must warm transfer the customer to the Income
Management Exemption and Assessment Team (IMEAT) after having the above
detailed discussion.

Work Items will be generated periodically prompting Service Officers to
discuss the exemption criteria and eligibility with customers. For more
information see Recording Exemption Service Offer for customers with
dependent children.

Role of Income Management Exemption and Assessment Team

The Income Management Exemption and Assessment Team (IMEAT) is a
specialist team responsible for the assessment of Income Management
exemptions.

They also provide support to the network around Income Management
exemptions. Contact details for IMEAT can be found in Office Locator
(Office Code EAT).

When a customer indicates they wish to apply for an exemption, the
Service Officer should ask why the customer wishes to be exempt from
Income Management and warm transfer the customer to IMEAT. This is only
to occur after explaining the individual requirements that apply in
order to meet the exemption criteria.

IMEAT will:

Discuss qualifying criteria for an exemption with Disengaged Youth and
Long Term Welfare Payment Recipient customers

Provide details to the customer about the documentation or verification
that is required to be granted an exemption

Receive evidence from the customer, whether directly or via a Service
Centre

Assess an exemption application within five working days of receiving
all documentation

Complete a financial vulnerability test for customers with dependent
children

Assess evidence and grant or reject exemption applications

Contact the customer to advise the outcome

At the time of contacting a customer to advise of an successful
exemption has been granted:

-   Offer Voluntary Income Management (VIM) and book an Initial
    Assessment interview if required
-   Conduct a Disbursement interview (if the customer requests)
-   Offer Centrepay as a way to pay bills and expenses
-   Offer a referral to Financial Wellbeing and Capability Activities,
    and
-   Advise the customer about the 'Managing your money' page on the
    Services Australia website. This page offers useful information and
    resources to help people manage their money

Conduct Initial Assessment interviews at the time of contacting a
customer to advise the rejection of an exemption application

Assess an exclusion application under the ‘<25% max payment’ category,
for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient Youth customers

Customers with no dependent children

Customers applying for an exemption who do not have dependent children
do not need to be transferred to IMEAT. For more information about
exemptions for these customers, see Determining an exemption from Income
Management for customers without dependent children.

Voluntary Income Management (VIM)

Customers granted an exemption from Income Management can volunteer for
Income Management.

Note: customers on VIM will revert to Income Management under the DEY or
LTWPR measures if their exemption ends and they continue to meet the
criteria for those measures.

The Resources page contains links to the Income Management helpdesk
webform, Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) immunisation schedule
and forms and examples of grace period and exemptions from Income
Management.

Related links

Customers requesting an exemption from Income Management

Recording Exemption Service Offer for customers with dependent children

Conducting the financial vulnerability test for an exemption from Income
Management for customers with dependent children

Providing evidence and finalising the assessment for an exemption from
Income Management for customers with dependent children

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
