-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on Group payment schedules and
payments to organisations.

Group Payment scheme

The Group Payment scheme allows Services Australia to send payments to
an organisation (for example, nursing home, disability enterprise or
public trustee) for pension customers. Group payment schedule
arrangements occur when the customer lives in residential care, or when
the customer's financial affairs are being managed by a public trustee
which assumes responsibility for the customer's needs.

A bulk payment is paid to the organisation each fortnight for all the
customers they receive payments for. The organisation also receives a
schedule which displays each customer's name, Customer Reference Number
(CRN) and the amounts they were paid in the current and previous
fortnight.

New Group Payment Schedule arrangements

If an organisation wants to become a Group Payment organisation, see
Organisation wants to become a group payment organisation.

System requirements

It is preferable that customers paid via a Group Payment share the same
system environment as the physical location of the organisation being
paid on their behalf. For example, if the organisation is located in
Sydney, all the customers should be in environment S. If this is not the
case, the customer record should be transferred to the organisation's
environment prior to the arrangement being coded. This ensures that only
one schedule is produced per organisation. Where customers reside in a
different state, this may not be an option.

If a customer is linked (for example, separated due to ill health or has
a carer) to another customer's record, the system will not allow the
customer to be transferred, unless the linked record is also
transferred.

Due to the importance of both the organisation and the customer
(including linked records if applicable) being in the same environment,
a Display on Access (DOA) DOC must be recorded on the customer's (and
linked records if applicable) record, warning Service Officers not to
move the record from this environment due to the Group Payment Schedule
arrangement.

Group payment delivery

Regular payments (and any immediate payments) can only be issued to the
institution nominated on Entitlement Period End Day (EPED) B. Care must
be taken to ensure when paying arrears (for example, as a result of
finalising a new claim) reissuing a payment, or granting an Advance
Payment or urgent payment for customers who are on a group payment
arrangement, as a payment issued on any other EPED, or exceeds the
system limit, will fail to deliver. See Reissuing a rejected payment.

Accessing group payment schedule information

Organisations that have transitioned to Business Hub will receive their
fortnightly group schedule via Letters in Business Hub.

Note: Organisations that have not transitioned can continue to access
their group payment schedules via Organisation Online Mail (OOM)

Payment schedules can be accessed online from the Thursday morning
following payment delivery (EPED D). Organisations that receive their
schedules online will not receive a paper copy of their schedule;
however, the fortnightly schedule can be reprinted by Service Officers
if requested.

If a group schedule has not been received, staff should lodge a service
request with mySupport. The Process page contains specific instructions
in these situations. An Organisation can access their group payment
schedules online when they create a Provider Digital Access (PRODA)
account and link it to Business Hub.

Reprinting

Organisations that receive their fortnightly schedule online can request
reprinted copies of the schedule from the agency. Schedules can be
reprinted from the History Summary (HS) screen up to 62 days from the
date of payment or, if 62 days or more, they can be retrieved from the
Archive and Culling Engine (ACE).

Organisation bank account

If a group payment organisation wants to change their bank account that
the recipients' payments are paid into, they need to contact the
National Business Gateway.

Cease Group Payment Schedule arrangement

To cease a Group Payment Schedule arrangement, see Changing payment
destination.

The Resources page contains links to the Group Payment form (SS270), the
Nominee form (SS313), Office Locator, mySupport, a listing of
organisations approved to receive their schedules online, contact
details for the National Business Gateway, ICT Service Desk Urgent
Escalation line and the Seniors, Carers, Nominees and Bereavement
Programme.

Related links

Organisation wants to become a group payment organisation

Adding or rejecting a nominee request

Business Hub

Transition to Business Hub

Reissuing a rejected payment

Reissuing a group payment paid to an organisation in error

Changing payment destination

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
