-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to reissue funds from over-recovered debts
and payments unable to be generated by any other system workaround. This
is done by the use of the Payment Adjustment (PYAJ) screen.

Limited access to PYAJ screen

Access to the PYAJ screen is limited to:

-   service centre and Smart Centre officers at the APS 5 or above level
-   ICT Service Desk Staff
-   Payment Helpdesk Staff
-   Debt Staff

Application required for access to PYAJ

Staff not included in the above list who require PYAJ screen access,
must make application via the ICT Security portal. If approved, access
will be limited to a reviewable period.

All requests must include a clear description as to why access is
required. Generic comments including ‘needed for adjusting payments’
will be rejected.

Requests relating to COVID payment are only approved for 4 weeks. Ensure
correct end date is entered in request.

System problems

The PYAJ screen should only be used to make payments to customers where
the system is unable to process refunds or where there are genuine
system faults which prevent the normal use of the system to make a
payment.

Payments made via PYAJ as an approved workaround for system limitations
do not need to be reported to the ICT Service Desk.

System problems should be referred to the ICT Service Desk in the first
instance. They will analyse the customer's record to identify the most
appropriate system action and will advise if/when coding details on the
PYAJ screen is the only option. Correct recording of the date of event
should result in correct payments being issued in most cases. The
Assessment Results (AR) screen should be carefully checked before
finalising any activity.

Referrals to the ICT Service Desk will be regarded as high priority as
it is payment related.

The PYAJ screen cannot be used to pay Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Bereavement payments

Bereavement payments are to be assessed through the customer's record
using the applicable bereavement procedures and must not be paid via
PYAJ.

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
