-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines information on how to determine if a customer is
eligible for a BasicsCard and how to issue a new BasicsCard.

What is a BasicsCard

The BasicsCard is an allocation method for income managed funds, to
allow a customer to meet their and their family's priority needs. A
BasicsCard is available to Income Management (IM) customers only.

When issuing a BasicsCard to the IM customer or their payment nominee,
Service Officers will thermally print the cardholder's name on the front
of the BasicsCard, where thermal printers are available. If this is not
available, Service Officers must ensure they write the cardholder's name
on the back of the BasicsCard in a fine point permanent marker pen.

BasicsCard eligibility

All customers who are income managed are eligible to receive a
BasicsCard. The BasicsCard is a voluntary option and customers can
choose not to be issued a BasicsCard if there are other suitable
allocation options to meet their and their family's priority needs.

If the customer is on enhanced Income Management and wants a temporary
card issued, see: Temporary SmartCards.

Who can issue a BasicsCard

A BasicsCard can be issued by:

-   Service Officers at Centrelink Service Centres
-   Remote Service Centres or by a Remote Servicing Team (RST)
-   asking via the Income Management Line (1800 132 594). It will be
    posted to the customer’s mailing address

Allocating funds to the BasicsCard

There are two ways customers receive funds to their BasicsCard. These
models are the Residual Payment method or the Partial Payment method.

Customers can change their BasicsCard allocation method by contacting
Services Australia.

[] Customers can also allocate funds to their BasicsCard through online
services or by contacting Services Australia. See Coding Income
Management Expenses for more information on allocating funds to the
BasicsCard.

PIN security

When issuing a BasicsCard to the customer, ensure the card holder is
advised of the importance of keeping their BasicsCard and Personal
Identification Number (PIN) secure, and not sharing their card or PIN
with anyone.

Purchases with multiple BasicsCards

If a BasicsCard merchant is aware that a person is making multiple
purchases and paying by different BasicsCards, the merchant should check
whether the person is a payment nominee, by referencing the payment
nominee's name printed on the front of the BasicsCard or manually
written on the back of the BasicsCard. Merchants should not permit
different BasicsCards to be used to pay for multiple purchase
transactions where the person is not a payment nominee.

The Resources page contains a link to BasicsCard balance check options,
contact details for BasicsCard enquiries.

Related links

BasicsCard

BasicsCard reactivate posted or previously suspended card

Nominee arrangements under Income Management

BasicsCard reported as lost, stolen, damaged or found

BasicsCard changing daily spend, maximum card balance limits and
allocation method

Inventory Tracking System (ITS) for temporary SmartCards and BasicsCards

Managing Income Management funds

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

BasicsCard request to change Personal Identification Number (PIN)

BasicsCard balance or transaction summary enquiry

BasicsCard close an account

BasicsCard dispute resolution

BasicsCard merchant information, eligibility and approval

Income Management and BasicsCard Work Items

Income Management and BasicsCard self service options

Transfer of funds between Income Management Account and BasicsCard
online

Business and organisation search tools

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
