-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines the actions for release of information to a
customer. For Child Support the below principles apply to customers and
employers/organisations. Service Officers, including Smart Centre
Service Officers, should ensure all procedures are followed.

Documents

A definition of a 'document' in this guide is broadly stated and is not
exhaustive. It should cover any information held by the agency in
various formats and includes, but is not limited to:

-   Paper and electronic records
-   Emails
-   Microsoft Teams messages
-   Call recordings and other audio files
-   Photographs and images, including CCTV

Administrative access processes

Services Australia has a number of administrative processes in place
that allow for access to information outside the formal FOI Act request
process. This is an informal and flexible way of providing information
and documents, when requested by a member of the public. These
administrative processes are particularly for customers or their
authorised representative wanting access to information and/or documents
relating to them. This is generally termed administrative access or
administrative release.

A member of the public should not be required to complete a formal FOI
request where the information and/or documents contain the person's own
information that is not sensitive to release. All staff must help a
person access information and/or documents through administrative
release where the secrecy provisions of the appropriate legislation
and/or the Privacy Act 1988 allow, and where the information and/or
documents are not otherwise sensitive.

Check before releasing information

Any release of information that has been collected by the agency under
Child Support, Family Assistance, Social Security or Medicare
legislation must be assessed in accordance with the secrecy provisions
of the specific legislation.

If releasing documents not supplied by the customer, Service Officers
must check to ensure that it does not contain:

-   information about other people, for example, partner or parent
    details. Consent from the third party would be needed before
    releasing information about that person. If express or implied
    consent is not provided, the person requesting the information
    should be advised why the documents cannot be provided
    administratively. They can be assisted to lodge a Freedom of
    Information (FOI) request if a formal decision under the FOI Act is
    required
-   the identity of a confidential source of information
-   information received in confidence

If documents contain the full name of staff, direct contact details or
other information identifying staff, and these details have not been
provided to the customer previously, then delete this material before
release.

If unsure what information or documents can be released, the Service
Officer should seek further information from their Line Manager.

Time frame for release

Immediate release

Documents should be released at point of contact where this is
available. For example, information or documents that can be printed
from the customer record.

Within 30 days

Some information or documents may not be available for release at the
point of contact. In these cases, documents should be released as soon
as practicable and within 30 days. The customer should be kept informed
of the likely release date and any delays that may occur in the
retrieval of documents.

Availability at point of contact may be impacted by storage arrangements
(for example, off site storage of paper files or retrieval requirements
for call recordings). Clearance requirements may also impact immediate
release.

Information and/or documents that cannot be provided through administrative release

If information and/or documents cannot be provided to the customer
through administrative release, or through the provisions of a letter
containing the information they are seeking, the customer must be
assisted to make a formal FOI request.

The Resources page contains links to forms located on the Services
Australia website and a coversheet for use when releasing information to
the customer under administrative release.

Related links

Requests lodged under the Freedom of Information Act 1982

Disclosing information to third parties

Disclosing information to a nominee

Call and screen recording - information and access

Documenting Child Support information

Release of Disability Support Pension (DSP) Medical Assessment reports

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
