-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines staff responsibilities, how to run the script to
code new grants, rejections, updates and reviews of foreign pensions. A
different procedure applies for handling foreign pension claims and
other foreign income and assets.

Impact on mailing issues due to coronavirus (COVID-19)

Due to coronavirus (COVID-19), there may be mailing issues for customers
outside Australia and Agreement partners.

Coding foreign pensions

Foreign pensions are coded on the Foreign Pension Details (FPD) screen.
There are specific rules about the date of event to use when coding
foreign pensions. The Resources page has examples of determining the
date of event to use for coding. The Foreign Pension Script will help
staff to code foreign pensions correctly and is mandated to be used when
available.

Information is available on known foreign pensions from agreement
countries and some non-agreement countries. To help identify foreign
payments, sample foreign documents may be available through the
International Program homepage. The Resources page has a link to the
International Program homepage.

Note: generally, all foreign pensions should be coded in the source
currency. Foreign currency amounts are converted to Australian dollars
using an appropriate exchange rate. See Foreign currency and exchange
rates. Where genuine circumstances or difficulties prevent the customer
from providing an official statement, staff should code what the
customer has provided. This will avoid any ongoing overpayment or delays
to processing. This can include details from the customer claim, bank
statements or a customer declaration. See Process page for instructions.

Foreign pensions should be identified and coded correctly to make sure
that the payment is assessed properly:

-   old age or retirement pensions are usually coded as Type: 'AGE'
-   disability or invalidity pensions are usually coded as Type: 'INV'
-   pensions for survivors (widows, orphans, parents) are usually coded
    as Type: 'SUR'
-   military service pensions (that is, employed by army, navy, air
    force) are usually coded as Type: 'SER'
-   payments made for reasons arising from conflict (injury or
    internment) are usually coded as Type: 'WAR'
-   other foreign pensions are generally coded as Type: 'OPN'
-   restitution payments (for persecution during wartime) must be coded
    as Type: 'RSP'
    Note: in some cases AGE/INV/SUR pensions from Germany or Austria may
    include deemed periods of insurance due to National Socialist (Nazi)
    persecution. These payments must be recorded as Type: 'RSP'.

Note: staff must not create a Foreign Pension Details (FPD) record just
to record a foreign pension reference number. Only record a foreign
pension reference number on FPD if rate information has been received
for a foreign pension. Otherwise, foreign pension reference numbers
should be recorded on the Foreign Claim Detail (FGD) screen. For
example, Work and Income New Zealand (WINZ) may ask staff to update
records with a New Zealand (NZ) reference number (SWN) so they can
access the International Verification Facility (IVF, the portal). The
SWN should be recorded on FGD unless:

-   an FPD record already exists
-   an Assumed Rate is being recorded (see New Zealand Agreement and
    foreign pension information), or
-   to process a NZ Service Decision (NZ notice of grant)

Pensions, components and rates

Many foreign pensions are made up of the main pension, generally coded
in the Basic Amount: field and supplementary benefits may be added,
generally coded in the Social/Welfare Amt: field.

However, there are specific coding requirements for a number of known
foreign pension types and there may be individual components of pensions
or supplements that must be recorded separately or, in some cases,
cannot be coded at all.

Some foreign pension entitlements may actually be separate pensions
rather than components. The basic principle is that the income is
assessable against the person who is entitled to the payment, even if
received by another person. For example:

-   US Spouse or Child Pension are entitlements of the spouse or child
    and, if assessable, should be coded on the spouse's or child's
    record, or
-   Swiss child benefit is an entitlement of the Swiss Old Age or
    Invalidity pensioner and is added to the Old Age or Invalidity
    pension rate

In all cases, the gross rate of foreign pensions and components is
assessable even if there are deductions for tax, health insurance or
even other pension insurance, for example, old age insurance paid by
invalidity pensioners. However, care must be taken with some reductions
for which the pensioner receives no value, such as some Greek austerity
reductions, which actually reduce the gross rate payable.

Arrears and lump sums

Foreign pension lump sums may be arrears of a comparable foreign payment
(CFP) that represents cumulative entitlement for a period in the past,
usually associated with a new grant. The ongoing rate of the foreign
pension must be coded from the correct date of event first and then the
arrears payment should be considered. The treatment and coding of CFP
arrears are covered in Comparable foreign payment lump sum arrears
debts.

Other lump sums may be:

-   a separate entitlement or ad hoc payments with their own
    qualification criteria, such as, bereavement or funeral grants,
-   bonus payments on top of the foreign pension, such as, annual
    holiday or Christmas bonuses,
-   payments in lieu of pension, such as, if a customer's rate of
    pension is too small or if the provisions of the legislation allow
    commutation of a pension to a lump sum, or
-   refund of contributions when a customer does not have enough
    insurance to qualify for a pension or other withdrawals

The treatment and coding of other foreign lump sums is covered in
Treatment of Lump Sums. However, if the payment of a lump sum prevents
any further entitlement to a foreign pension, the FPS status must be
updated from the relevant date to reflect the customer is not entitled
to a pension from that country (FIN-NOM), see Foreign Pension System
(FPS) statuses and reviews.

Staff responsibilities for foreign pension coding

Note: if the customer is only advising a change in exchange rate and not
a new grant or change in the rate of a foreign pension, see Foreign
currency and exchange rates.

International Services (CIS) is responsible for:

-   coding all new instances of foreign pensions from any country
-   coding or updating any foreign pensions for customers paid their
    Australian payment under a social security agreement
-   updating any foreign pension that has been previously updated
    through an automated foreign pension update process

Service centre or Smart Centre Call staff are responsible for actioning:

-   foreign pension reviews and changes to existing foreign pensions in
    all other cases
-   foreign earnings, private superannuation, income and assets updates,
    see Foreign income and assets.

CIS are usually notified of a grant or rejection of a foreign pension
from an agreement country. In some circumstances, customers will still
be asked to supply a copy of their statement from the paying authority
even though information has been received from the agreement country.
Foreign pension statements presented by customers should still be
accepted.

The Foreign Pension Script must be used when coding foreign pensions.
The script will guide the user through the coding process. All foreign
pension documents, such as Notice of Grant (NOG) or advice of the change
of rate, must be scanned to the customer record.

Bereavement provisions

In general, a person is notified of the grant of a foreign pension
before any money is actually paid. In many cases, Services Australia may
even be notified of the grant before the customer. Policy advice is
that, if a person who is entitled to a foreign pension is deceased at
the time of processing the notice, it is unlikely that the person
received the benefit of the income so no further action is taken for
either the person or surviving spouse. Similarly, if the person's
partner is deceased at the time of processing, then there is no partner
debt but may be a debt for the customer.

This does not apply to a person who simply failed to declare their
pension and did receive the benefit of the income. In these cases, both
arrears debts and debts for failing to notify Services Australia should
be raised and recovery attempted.

If a customer is granted a survivor's (widow/er) pension or an increase
in their own payment following the death of a partner, the survivor's
pension income, or additional surviving spouse payment is not assessed
during the bereavement period.

If the survivor (widow/er) pension is granted after the death of a
partner who was receiving a Restitution payment made to victims of Nazi
(Nationalist Socialist) persecution from Germany, Austria or the
Netherlands, the survivor's (widow's) payment should also be recorded as
type 'RSP'.

Date of event for foreign pension coding

The date from which coding is recorded on FPD may not be the date the
payment commenced/changed. This is to allow for the fact that foreign
pensions are generally granted with an arrears period, varied
notification rules in other countries and our own notification period.

The general rule is, if the Date Of Receipt (DOR) of the advice (whether
it came from the customer or from the paying authority, for example, a
liaison provided by an agreement partner) is:

outside the customer's notification period â€“ the actual date of change
is used (coding DOV = actual DOV)

within the customer's notification period - the earlier of the following
dates is used:

-   the date the customer received the advice (coding DOV = customer
    DOR), or
-   the date the customer received the first ongoing payment (coding DOV
    = First Regular Pay Date (FRPD))

The exceptions to this are:

-   if arrears are paid and the arrears period is known â€“ the date will
    be the later of the date determined above, or the day following the
    Arrears Period End Date (coding DOV = APED+1)
-   if arrears are paid and the arrears period is not known â€“ the date
    will be the date the coding is processed (coding DOV = t for today),
    or
-   if a customer is granted a survivor pension or receives an increase
    in rate due to the death of their partner â€“ the date will be the
    later of the date determined above, or the day following the
    Bereavement Period End Date (coding DOV = BPED+1)

Overpayments and notices

Customers who do not declare a grant or change in the rate of a foreign
pension within their notification period may incur an overpayment. It is
also common for customers to receive lump sum arrears of foreign
pensions, which may also result in an overpayment. If the customer is a
member of a couple, the partner may also have been overpaid.

Debts for failing to notify in time and for arrears lump sums are raised
under different sections of the social security law. This means that
customers will often have multiple debts, which need separate notices to
be issued. Multiple notices may also be issued to the customer's
partner.

Rejections, cancellations and reviews of foreign pensions

Rejections, suspensions and cancellations

Some customers need to make a claim for a foreign pension. If the claim
is rejected, it is necessary to first check if the customer took
reasonable steps to complete the claim process or not, for example,
rejecting for failing to provide details. See Assisting customers to
claim a foreign pension.

Foreign pension authorities may need a customer to provide details to
continue to receive an existing foreign pension, for example, life
certificates. If a person who is receiving a foreign pension does not
comply with a reasonable request by a foreign pension authority, they
may be considered to have deprived themselves of income. See Assisting
customers to maintain an existing foreign pension.

Reviews of foreign pensions

Foreign pensions are usually indexed for cost of living increases each
year. Customers are obligated to notify of increases to their foreign
pension. If the foreign pension is from a country that is covered by an
automated foreign pension update process Services Australia will
generally receive CPI increases automatically.

If a customer's marital status changes, for example becomes single or
partnered, the rate of a foreign pension may change and should be
reviewed.

The Resources page has links and contact details for the International
Program homepage and International Services homepage. It also has
information on determining the event date to use for coding and a list
of Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) about the Foreign Pension script.

Contents

Foreign income and assets

Foreign income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Related links

International Social Security Agreements

Eligibility and coding of foreign pensions from non-agreement countries

Foreign currency and exchange rates

Comparable foreign payment lump sum arrears debts

New Zealand embargoes

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

International Data Exchange Program and auto indexation of foreign
pensions

Coding CRES, ARD and RSS screen

Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â  Â 

-   Services Australia ABN 90Â 794Â 605Â 008Â 
