-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to take the correct action on a new debt
activity. This can include raising the debt, finalising no debt, or a
waiver. This process is used for debt raising under Social Security Act
1991, Student Assistance Act 1973 and A New Tax System (Family
Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999, section 70, Debts due to the
Commonwealth (excluding Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS).

Access requirements to action debt activities

Debt Staff have the required system access to perform debt related
functions, such as running the Debt Script.

Non-Debt Staff required to perform a debt related action need the
appropriate security access. See the Resources page of General debt
raising information.

Debt action

DMIS registers an undetermined debt (debt activity) through:

-   a reassessment from the host system, or
-   a link between DMIS and another system such as the Integrated Review
    System (IRS)

Investigate the undetermined debt to check:

-   if the customer received payments in excess of their entitlement,
    and
-   there is a legally recoverable debt

Use the Debt Action script to record the details and outcome of the
debt.

A separate procedure applies for debts managed in Process Direct.

Manually add a debt record to DMIS if the system did not create one.

Clean screen policy

Action all debts on a customer record at the same time. This clean
screen policy must be adhered to where possible, see the Resources page.

System generated duplicate payment debts

The system generates a duplicate payment debt when a customer contacts
advising they have not received their payment and requests a replacement
payment. The payment is reissued to the customer, however the original
payment is not returned. A duplicate payment debt is generated for the
reissued payment, see the Resources page for an example.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority Instructions
(AAI).

The Resources page contains a list of debt reason codes, examples of
correct debt amalgamation and suggested responses to scenarios under the
clean screen policy. It also contains examples of how legally payable
arrears to be used to offset debts are calculated as well as a duplicate
payment.

Related links

Debt identification

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts

Debt investigation

Workload Management (WLM) updates for Payment Assurance Operations
Division - Compliance and Debt staff

Waiving Centrelink debts

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

General information on Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities

Raising and attribution of Service Update debts

Debt tools

Debt ownership

Using the correct date of effect when raising debts

Finalising Registrar-General's Office Interventions (RGO)

Using ADEX to explain a system generated debt

Reversal of waivers

Debt raising support for customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
