-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to add or update a defined benefit income
stream.

Defined benefit income stream

A defined benefit income stream is a pension paid from a defined benefit
superannuation fund or scheme, for example the defined benefit pensions
paid from the:

public sector superannuation schemes such as:

-   Commonwealth Super Scheme (CSS), Public Sector Super Scheme (PSS),
    and
-   State Super schemes such as Super SA and QSuper

private sector defined benefit funds such as Commonwealth Bank Officers
Super Fund and the BHP Staff Super Fund

industry funds such as UniSuper and Health Super

Most of these superannuation funds also offer account-based income
streams and lifetime income streams. Take care when determining when the
product is a defined benefit income stream or not.

The payments from a defined benefit income stream are defined by factors
such as:

-   an individual's age
-   salary at retirement
-   the number of years of service in the organisation, or
-   by criteria determined by the fund's governing rules

Payments are not defined solely by the amount of accumulated
superannuation funds used to purchase the income stream.

A defined benefit income stream is not:

-   a 'purchased' income stream, or
-   an income stream provided from self-managed superannuation funds
    (SMSFs) and small APRA funds (SAFs)

Even though the documents provided by SMSFs/SAFs may mention their
pension as being a defined benefit pension.

Some state government and private sector defined benefit funds allow
commutations. A defined benefit income stream from the Commonwealth
Superannuation Corporation (CSC), such as a CSS or PSS pension, cannot
be commuted after it has started.

Assets test assessment

Defined benefit income streams continue to be classified as asset-test
exempt (ATE). This is because there is an ongoing ministerial exemption
from the assets test for defined benefit schemes that existed before 20
September 1998.

Services Australia is not aware of any new schemes that started after 20
September 1998.

Income test assessment

Gross income - deductible amount = assessable income

Deductible amount

The HYPERLINK
"https://ourblueprint.internal.dept.local/pages/annotations/f-annotations/formula-used-to-calculate-the-tax-free-component-changed-from-1-july-2007.html"
\t "_blank". The calculation varies, depending on when the income
stream started.

The deductible amount is the tax-free component (TFC) of the income
stream as calculated by the superannuation fund. Not all defined benefit
income streams will have a tax-free component.

From 1 January 2016, the deductible amount is capped at 10% of the gross
income received from the income stream. This means if the income stream
has a TFC greater than 10% of the gross income, the TFC is capped at
10%.
Exception: the 10% cap will not apply to a person receiving a Service
Pension or the following Military defined benefit income streams:

-   Military Superannuation and Benefits Scheme, also known as
    MilitarySuper
-   Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Scheme (DFRDBS)
-   Defence Force Retirement Benefits Scheme (DFRBS)

Income stream schedule

From 1 July 2007, a one page Defined Benefit Income Stream Schedule (or
similar), is needed for pensions paid from all defined benefit schemes.
This includes public sector schemes such as Commonwealth Super Scheme
(CSS), Public Sector Super Scheme (PSS), MilitarySuper, and State Super
schemes.

The Resources page has a link to the schedule.

Reversionary income stream

The original recipient of the income stream may nominate a person to
receive the income after their death, for example, their surviving
spouse or partner. This person is the reversionary beneficiary.

On reversion to a reversionary beneficiary or partner, the defined
benefit income stream:

-   is assessed from the day after date of death of the primary
    beneficiary (deceased spouse or partner), which is the date the
    customer (reversionary beneficiary) is entitled to receive the
    payments
-   is treated as a continuation of the original income stream
-   start date will be the same as the original income stream
-   gross income may be reduced as the surviving partner generally
    receives a percentage of the pension paid to the primary beneficiary

There may be a gap between the death of the original beneficiary and the
date the reversionary starts to receive regular payments. A lump sum
arrears payment is made to the reversionary beneficiary to cover the
gap. The lump sum is assessed as income from the income stream for the
period to which it relates. This may result in a debt for that period if
the customer has been receiving an income support payment.

Waiver provisions came into effect from 9 May 2018:

-   where the lump sum arrears results in a debt during the bereavement
    period for the surviving spouse, and certain conditions are met
-   only debts within the 14 week bereavement period can be waived under
    these rules

The 9 May 2018 rules are not retrospective. Any of the debts occurring
before 9 May 2018 cannot be waived using these rules.

See the References page for a link to the legislation.

Successor Fund Transfer

A Successor Fund Transfer (SFT) is where all members of a superannuation
fund move to another superannuation fund. This includes members who have
an income stream.

For an income stream recipient, there can be no change to the terms and
conditions of the income stream product. The income stream will continue
to have the same start date as the original income stream. The only
change would be to the provider name and possibly the product reference
number. The exemption from the assets test would continue to apply to
the income stream.

Refer to the FINS Bulletin for a listing of SFT/IFTs.

Bulk updates

An automatic update is made to the customer's record if there are any
changes to the customer's fortnightly gross income or fortnightly tax
free component (deductible amount) due to indexation. The data is
provided to the agency as part of the Automation of Income Stream
Reviews (AISR) process.

If a customer advises an update to their gross income amount, check if
the agency received the information as part of a bulk update. The bulk
updates reduce customer contact and reduce the risk of error. If the
information on the record came from the income stream provider, the
channel type on the latest update will be ISP.

Online updates

[] Customers can advise of defined benefit income streams via their
Centrelink online account; however, they cannot make changes to existing
defined benefit income streams online. Manual handoff will occur where a
customer advises of a new defined benefit income stream. A DOC with
keyword OIAICS will start on the customer's record and a work item for
staff manual action is created on the customer's record with the details
provided by the customer. Staff can select the work item to process the
update in Process Direct.

Disability benefits paid from superannuation

Customers may receive disability benefits in the form of a lifetime
invalidity pension. A lifetime invalidity pension paid from a defined
benefit fund, is assessed as defined benefit income stream (product type
DEF).

The income stream is assessed from the date the person is notified of
the approval of their policy, it is not the date the person applied for
the benefit.

A lump sum arrears payment may be paid to cover the period before
regular payments started. For the period since notification of the
approval, the arrears will be assessed as a defined benefit. See Income
from personal injury insurance schemes and disability benefits for more
information on assessing lump sum arrears.

Regular ongoing periodic payments not paid as a lifetime invalidity
pension from a defined benefit fund are not assessed as an income
stream. See Income from personal injury insurance schemes and disability
benefits for more information.

SRDP and Commonwealth superannuation reduction income test exemption

Special Rate Disability Pension (SRDP) payments paid under the Veterans'
Entitlement Act (VEA) 1986 are reduced by Commonwealth Superannuation
payments, at a rate of 60%. The superannuation that is used to determine
the SRDP reduction amount is exempt income for Social Security purposes.

Note: since 1 January 2022, SRDP payments are also exempt from the
income test.

Requests for information

Requests for information to update income streams owned by a non-current
partner are sent to the customer.

Where the customer or partner is unable, or unwilling, to provide
information due to Family and domestic violence, escalate to AISR
support. AISR support will request the information directly from the
provider.

The Resources page has links to the online version of the Details of
Income Stream Product form (SA330), a one page Defined Benefit Income
Stream Schedule and a help document for coding Commonwealth Super Scheme
(CSS), Public Sector Super (PSS), Defence Force Retirement Benefits
(DFRB)/Defence Forces Retirement and Death Benefits (DFRDB) and Military
Benefit Scheme (MSBS) Reference Numbers.

Related links

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

Adding or updating a lifetime income stream

Adding or updating a life expectancy income stream

Adding or updating a term income stream

Superannuation

Treatment of lump sums

Assessing withdrawals from superannuation

Assessing income streams paid from Self Managed Superannuation Funds
(SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Income stream reviews

Actioning a ComSuper review

How to code and action a manual review

Income and assets options online

Income from personal injury insurance schemes and disability benefits

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
