-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to assess a commutation for an
asset-tested income stream. Commutation includes a lump sum withdrawal
in cash or directly transferring the funds (rollover) into another
income stream.

Description of asset-tested income stream

Asset-tested income streams do not comply with sections 9A, 9B or 9BA of
the Social Security Act. They are non-defined benefit income streams and
can be either account based or non-account based.

Exception: market-linked income streams, which are not eligible to
retain asset-test exemption and are re-assessed as asset-tested will
still have to comply with the requirements of section 9BA.

Partial commutation

A partial commutation will change the deduction amount and the asset
value for:

-   a non-account based product, for example a lifetime income stream,
    life expectancy income stream or term income stream, the original
    purchase price is reduced by the commutation amount to recalculate
    the new asset value
-   an account-based product such as an allocated income stream (other
    than a deemed (category 9) product), the asset value after a
    commutation is the account balance after the funds have been
    withdrawn

Asset-tested market-linked income streams

Asset-tested market-linked income streams (MLIs) are non-commutable
except in extremely limited circumstances.

Successor Fund Transfer

A Successor Fund Transfer (SFT) is where all members of a superannuation
fund move to another superannuation fund. This includes members who have
an income stream. The transfer can apply to all types of income streams,
however, it typically applies to account-based income streams.

For an income stream recipient, there can be no change to the terms and
conditions of the income stream product. The income stream will continue
to have the same purchase date, purchase price, relevant number and
total commutations as the original income stream. The only change would
be to the provider name, Australian Business Number (ABN) and possibly
the product reference number.

If the original income stream was grandfathered under the pre 1 January
2015 rules, and the customer continues to be receiving an income support
payment when the income stream is transferred, the income stream will
retain its grandfathered status.

Refer to the FINS Bulletin for a listing of SFT/IFTs.

The Resources page contains a link to the Details of income stream
product form (SA330).

Related links

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

Adding or updating a lifetime income stream

Adding or updating a life expectancy income stream

Adding or updating a term income stream

Commutation of asset-test exempt (ATE) income streams

Application to be allowed to commute all or part of an asset-test exempt
income stream due to extreme financial hardship

Adding or updating a defined benefit income stream

Assessing income streams paid from Self-Managed Superannuation Funds
(SMSF) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Assessing lifetime income streams paid from Self-Managed Superannuation
Funds (SMSF) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Assessing life expectancy income streams paid from Self-Managed
Superannuation Funds (SMSF) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Debts arising from commutation of asset-test exempt income streams

Reviewing actuarial certificates for lifetime or life expectancy asset
test exempt income streams from Self-Managed or Small SPRA Super Funds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
