-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about the assessment of income from
real estate.

Assessable income

Customers may get various types of income from real estate. If the
property, or part of it, is being used as a source of income, then
generally there are expenses incurred. These expenses can be offset
against the income to give a net income amount. This net amount is
generally the assessable income.

A capital gain is not assessed as income, unless it forms part of the
normal activity of a business, for example property development. If a
capital loss is made it cannot be offset against other income amounts.

Income from real estate is not employment income. Real estate income is
ordinary income. The customer is unable to deplete their Working Credit
balance to offset this real estate income.

Complex cases must be referred to the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO).

Temporarily vacant/untenanted properties

If a customer advises the real estate is no longer tenanted (vacant), no
income is assessable from the date of event. Expenses will continue to
be recorded as per previous assessment.

The value of the real estate would remain an assessable asset.

Once the property is again occupied and is being rented out as a source
of income, the new income is assessable. Expenses are assessed as
previously advised, unless customer provides updated details of
expenses.

Temporary cessation of rent payments during the COVID - 19 pandemic

On 29 March 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the National
Cabinet announced a six-month moratorium on evictions for residential
and commercial tenancies, and encouraged landlords and tenants to make
negotiations regarding rent payments.

All Australian states and territories have their own residential
tenancies legislation, which were updated as part of the emergency
response. Each state and territory then individually ceased these
emergency measures throughout early 2021.

If a customer advises their tenants were unable to pay rent due to the
Coronavirus pandemic, the rental income is removed from the Real Estate
(RE) screen. If the tenant later makes a lump sum payment of rent
arrears, this will be assessed separately to the real estate income. The
customer will be able to deduct expenses incurred while the rent was not
being paid.

Rental income from income tax returns

When a customer supplies an income tax return, check the period of
occupancy. If the property has not been rented for the entire year, the
income must be pro rata for the period of occupancy. Expenses are
assessed as per income tax return and are not pro rata. The Resources
page contains an example of rental income only received for part of the
financial year.

When a customer who has previously provided income tax returns, contacts
to advise rental income has changed, income must be updated from date of
the change. Expenses are assessed as previously advised, unless the
customer provides updated details of expenses.

The Resources page contains a link to the types of expenses that are
allowable deductions. Expenses of a capital nature, which would increase
the value of the asset that has been improved, are not allowed to be
offset against the rental income. For example, adding a new veranda or
pergola, landscaping the garden or putting up a picket fence.

Terms of a bequest

Income is assessed as above, if a property in which the customer has a
life interest is:

-   rented out, and
-   the person is required under the terms of the will to maintain the
    property, and
-   pay all the running expenses

However, if the customer has only the right to occupy a property, they
are not automatically entitled to income from rent. It will depend upon
the actual terms of the bequest, which must be checked before any
reassessment of the entitlement is made.

Where customers leave their principal home due to illness and enter a
care situation, their home and any rental income received may be
exempted from the Income Test and Assets Test in certain situations.

Interest in a business

Where customers have an interest in a business (that is, a sole trader
or a partnership) and the business owns real estate, the net income from
the business must be determined.

If this is a customer's first contact about real estate or there are
changes, Service Officers should obtain a Real Estate Details (MOD R)
and tax returns from the customer. An updated Business Details (MOD F)
may also be required.

Temporary boarders and lodgers (including Accommodation Booking Services)

A customer may get income from short term (temporary) boarders and
lodgers.

Examples include:

-   a homeowner or tenant who only rents out a room when there is a
    sports event at the nearby ground, or
-   someone who rents out a room via a home share site such as Airbnb

This income is treated in the same manner as other board and lodging.
For details, see Income from boarders and lodgers.

One third rule

If the customer cannot provide their latest tax return as evidence of
income and expenses, the 'one third rule' must be used as an interim
measure until more detailed evidence is provided.

Once an assessment is based on actual evidence, the customer cannot
revert to the 'one third rule'.

Rental income where customer does not lodge income tax return

If the customer did not lodge an income tax return, as their income was
too low, a profit and loss type statement must be provided.

The Resources page contains a link to the Australian Taxation Office
Rental Properties publication. This publication provides information and
a worksheet that may assist customers to prepare a profit and loss for
rental income.

Note: if a customer has an interest in a private company or trust that
has an interest in a property, this is not assessed using this method.
Attribution of income is the method generally used to assess income from
investment properties owned by separate entities such as trusts and
companies. The Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) will assess the income
and assets from trusts and companies.

Government rental program payments for property owners

A property owner may receive a payment or a tax offset to provide
housing. For example, the National Rent Affordability Scheme. These
payments are included in the income assessed for the rental property.

Timeshare

Customers may have invested in a timeshare in a property. A MOD R is not
required for timeshares in most cases, and valuations must not be
requested for timeshare assets. The value used is the purchase price
unless the customer can provide evidence the recent sales indicate the
value has fallen.

Before December 2015, income from a timeshare was assessed the same as
income from other real estate assets. That is, rental income received
for the period the timeshare was rented - allowable expenses for the
same period = net assessable income.

From December 2015, timeshare investments are treated as managed
investments. Income received from a timeshare are not recorded, as
deeming will apply to the investment.

The Resources page contains scenarios and links to forms, the Services
Australia website and the Australian Taxation Office website.

Related links

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Assessing house and curtilage

Income and expenses of a business

Assessing and coding real estate details

Vacation of principal home due to illness

Assessing and coding the Business details for sole traders and
partnerships Mod F

Board and lodging

Business deductions

Assessment of trusts and companies

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Managed investments - adding a new investment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
