-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess and report allowances paid with
employment income.

On this page:

Assessment of allowances paid with employment income

The income test assessment of allowances paid with employment income
depends on what the allowance is paid for and how often it’s paid. Some
allowances are treated as exempt income and do not need to be reported.
If an allowance needs to be reported the customer must include the gross
amount paid with their fortnightly employment income report.

Allowances paid for tasks that involve additional responsibility or inconvenient work conditions

Allowances that are paid for tasks that involve additional
responsibility or inconvenient work conditions are assessed as
employment income and need to be reported. Examples of these types of
allowances are:

-   Shift allowance
-    Danger allowance
-    First aid allowance

See Resources for more examples of allowances.

Allowances paid for a work related expense

Allowances that are paid regularly throughout the year for ongoing work
related expenses are exempt income and do not need to be reported.
Examples of allowances for work related expenses that are generally paid
on a regular basis are:

-   Tool allowance
-    Laundry allowance
-    Working from home allowance

Allowances paid by an employer to cover a one-off or irregular work
related expense are exempt income and do not need to be reported.
Exception: If the allowance amount exceeds the expense incurred, the
difference is assessed as employment income and needs to be reported.
Examples of this type of allowance are:

-   Travel allowance
-    Meal allowance
-    Fuel allowance

See Resources tab for more examples of allowances.

Allowances which are not employment income

An allowance is not treated as employment income if:

-   it is paid to a person where an employer/employee relationship does
    not exist, and
-    the allowance is not directly in return for remunerative work
    undertaken, and does not represent back-pay

For example, the Salvation Army provides a Retired Officer Allowance and
Long Service Allowance. These allowances are paid to a retired officer
for recognition of past service prior to retirement. Payments are
treated as ordinary income and are recorded on the Other Income (OIN)
screen.

Employment allowances and Single Touch Payroll (STP)

If STP data shows that a customer has had an allowance paid, they will
be asked to check, confirm or change the pre-filled details. The
allowance type will indicate if it needs to be included as assessable
income for the reporting period.

More information about STP employment income details can be found in
Resources at Single Touch Payroll (STP) Assessment of allowances paid
with employment income.

Reporting allowances for family assistance customers

Although an allowance may not be assessable for social security
purposes, it may be taxable and must be included in a customer's
adjusted taxable income for family assistance payments. Customers should
check with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) if their allowance needs
to be declared for taxation purposes.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website
information regarding allowances and STP prefill data as well as
examples of types of allowances paid with employment income.

Related links

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Employment income for Centrelink assessments

Exempt income

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
