-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This page contains links to policy and legislation.

On this Page:

Policy

Legislation

Policy

ABSTUDY

Links to the ABSTUDY Policy Manual and the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme guidelines point to consolidated pdf and docx
documents. Select the document and navigate to the appropriate
reference(s) listed below.

The Parental Income Test (PIT) and limits are covered in the:

ABSTUDY Policy Manual

-   58.1, Exemptions from the Parental Income Test
-   58.2, Whose income is assessed under the Parental Income Test?

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

For information on how family circumstances affect whether the applicant
and their partner's income is taken into account for the PIT,

See: Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Guidelines

-   6.2, Whose income is taken into account?
-   6.10, Waiver of the Parental Income Test

Youth Allowance (YA)

Guide to Social Security Law, 1.1.P.40, Parental income test (YA)

Parental Income Test (PIT)

Guide to Social Security Law, 4.2.8.10, Dependent YA - Parental Income
Test & Limits

Policy advice regarding step-parents

A step-parent is the partner of the parent who has primary care and
responsibility of the dependent ABSTUDY or Youth Allowance (YA)
recipient or claimant or AIC applicant.

See Social Security Act 1991, section 5(1), Dependent child-under 16

The income of the step-parent is taken into account for the Parental
Income Test for the AIC Additional Boarding Allowance, ABSTUDY or YA
where the step-parent lives with the parent and the recipient or
claimant normally lives with the parent and step-parent. The earliest
this may be applied is the date the parent and step-parent normally live
together and this may include the event occurring while the recipient or
claimant is absent from the home but normally lives with the parent.

Normally lives with means that the ABSTUDY or YA recipient or claimant's
normal home is the same as the parent and step-parent. The recipient or
claimant may live away from home to undertake study, to search for work
or undertake other activities but still not establish their own
permanent and separate home, i.e. they intend to return home.

However, should they have established a separate home with no intention
of returning other than for a visit, it may be accepted that they do not
normally live at home, subject to verification. Whether or not the
recipient or claimant has ever normally lived with the step-parent once
they cease to normally live at home is irrelevant and for the Parental
Income Test the step-parent's income should not be included.

It is possible that over a period of time the recipient or claimant may
claim to move in and out of the parent/step-parent's home on a permanent
basis and, if proper verification process is applied each time, there is
no impediment to such a change in circumstances being applied.

Legislation

Links to the Federal Register of Legislation site go to a 'Series' page.
Select the 'Latest' version.

Youth Allowance (YA)

Social Security Act 1991, section 5, Family relationships definitions -
children

Parental Income Test (PIT)

Social Security Act 1991, section 1067G, Module F, Parental income test

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
