-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps taken when a non-homeowner customer
purchases a home to be their principal residence. After purchasing a
home which is to be used as the customer's principal residence, a
customer's financial circumstances may have significantly changed. An
income and assets review should be conducted to ensure Centrelink has
the correct information recorded.

Principal home

A customer's first home will generally be their principal home. If the
home is not the customer's principal place of residence, it will be
assessed as an asset. The customer must uniquely identify the location
of any real estate or business site they own or have an interest in.

Note: if the customer has received a payment made under the law of the
Commonwealth or by a State or Territory to assist a person to build or
purchase their own home, such as the first home buyers grant, this is
exempt income.

House and curtilage assessment from 1 January 2007

For all new claims from 1 January 2007, the Assets Test assessment for
the principal home and curtilage has been restricted to the customer's
house and the adjacent land on the same title document. This is known as
the single title rule. The term curtilage means the land surrounding the
home. There are now two curtilage tests used to determine a customer's
allowable house and curtilage concession, a 'private land use test' and
an 'extended land use test'. A grandfathered savings provision for real
estate will grandfather concessions for real estate for two groups of
existing customers on payments prior to 1 January 2007, who would
otherwise be disadvantaged by the application of the new one title
rules.

This procedure does not cover house and curtilage assessments.

Related links

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Assessing house and curtilage

Assessing and coding real estate details

Assessing and coding the Business details for sole traders and
partnerships Mod F

Assessing and coding the Private Trust Mod PT

Assessing and coding the Private Company details from the MOD PC

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
