-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Time to Work Employment Service (TWES)
programme.

TWES

TWES is a national, in-prison programme, that focuses on pre-release
services for adult Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. TWES
assists adult, sentenced Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander prisoners
to access the support they need to better prepare them to reintegrate
into the community and find employment following release from prison.

TWES aims to improve the timeliness, coordination, appropriateness and
quality of employment services provided to Aboriginal and Torres Strait
prisoners, providing each participant with a tailored Transition Plan
and facilitated transfer to their post-release Employment Services
Provider, where possible.

As TWES is a pre-release programme, it is not designed to find jobs for
participants and operates separately from other employment services.

Thirteen TWES providers service 65 non-remote prisons that are managed
by the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations. Community
Development Program (CDP) TWES providers service 8 remote prisons that
are managed by the National Indigenous Australians Agency.

Role of Services Australia in TWES

The role of Services Australia in servicing pre-release prisoners who
have participated in TWES is different to servicing pre-release
prisoners who are not TWES participants.

Where a prisoner has volunteered to be a TWES participant, the TWES
provider will conduct the Job Seeker Snapshot and arrange for an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) where possible.

Services Australia will conduct the ESAt where access can be arranged
prior to release.

As part of the pre-release interview, where the Job Seeker Snapshot and
the ESAt have been completed, Services Australia staff are required to
make the referral to the post-release Employment Services Provider where
possible. The Process page contains information about TWES servicing.

TWES programme components

The TWES programme consists of:

-   face-to-face, in-prison employment servicing by a TWES provider,
    including the Job Seeker Snapshot
-   offer for referral to an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) to
    identify employment-related support requirements or barriers,
    regardless of the outcome of the Job Seeker Snapshot
-   a Transition Plan, developed with the TWES provider, incorporating
    activities to address and/or acknowledge these barriers identified
    in the Job Seeker Snapshot and Employment Services Assessment
    (ESAt), and
-   where possible, a facilitated transfer of the participant by the
    TWES provider to a post-release Employment Services Provider

All components of the TWES programme are voluntary and a participant may
withdraw from the program at any time by advising their TWES provider
that they no longer want to participate. This will not have any impact
on future claims or income support payments.

Where a TWES participant withdraws from the program prior to release,
they are treated the same as any other prisoner who has not participated
in TWES.

Eligibility

To participate, a prisoner must be:

-   self-identifying as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander (no proof
    of ancestry required),
-   18 years of age or over, and
-   sentenced, with 3-4 months (and not less than 2 months) remaining
    before their earliest possible release date

Identifying a TWES participant

Pre-release, the TWES participation indicator is found in the
Participation Summary screen, under Job Seeker Registration Information.
Once they have been released and a provider referred actioned, the
post-release Employment Services Provider details will display here.

TWES Providers

TWES providers are Employment Services Providers who connect with
participants face-to-face in prisons to provide in-prison employment
services.

TWES Provider enquiries

Although a Commonwealth program, participating prisons are run by the
State and Territory governments and private organisations. There are
local variations to how the program is delivered, between States and
Territories, and sometimes between different prisons within the same
State or Territory.

Services Australia staff must not answer any enquiries from TWES
providers. The Resources page contains information that Services
Australia staff can use when contacted by TWES providers.

Job Seeker Snapshot

TWES providers conduct a Job Seeker Snapshot with the TWES participant.
This Job Seeker Snapshot contains the following additional questions
specific to TWES participants:

-   Do you still have the paperwork for your qualification?
-   Would you still like to work in a job where you can use the skills
    you learnt?
-   Are you eligible to get a driver's license?
-   Is your car/motorcycle registered and roadworthy?

Where the TWES provider has conducted the Job Seeker Snapshot, the
agency is not required to conduct the Job Seeker Snapshot as part of the
pre-release interview or as part of the post release claim process,
unless the agency staff member identifies there has been a change of
circumstances since the Job Seeker Snapshot was conducted, other than
prison release.

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) referral

Regardless of the outcome of the Job Seeker Snapshot, all TWES
participants are offered a referral to the agency for an ESAt.

Where a participant agrees to undergo an ESAt, the TWES provider is
responsible for:

-   obtaining medical evidence and providing it to Services Australia,
    and
-   arranging the ESAt appointment

Services Australia is responsible for:

-   conducting the ESAt with the participant, via telephone where
    possible, and
-   submitting the ESAt report

Once the ESAt report is finalised in Services Australia's system, the
TWES provider is notified of the recommendations via the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations IT System.

Where an ESAt has been conducted through the TWES programme, another
ESAt is not necessary as part of the post-release claim process, unless
there has been a significant change in circumstances, other than prison
release, which will change the outcome of the ESAt.

Pre-release interview (service officer in Face to Face Incarcerated Customer Servicing team)

A service officer in Face to Face Incarcerated Customer Servicing team
conducts the pre-release interview with TWES participants up to 21
business days before the participant's release from prison, and where
servicing can be arranged prior to release occurring.

The pre-release interview is conducted using the standard methods for
that prison and/or zone. During the pre-release interview, in addition
to routine procedures, the service officer in Face to Face Incarcerated
Customer Servicing team uses information from the Job Seeker Snapshot
and ESAt to refer TWES participants to an appropriate post-release
Employment Services Provider.

Pre-release interview not completed

Where a pre-release interview was not completed and/or a referral to a
provider was not made at the pre-release interview, the referral should
be completed as part of the First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow
when the job seeker makes contact post-release.

Exemptions for job seekers recently released from prison

If a job seeker recently released from prison participated in TWES, they
are not eligible for a Major Personal Crisis (MPC) exemption solely on
the basis of prison release. See Mutual obligation requirement
exemptions and Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements for prison
release customers.

Related links

Identifying barriers to participation for prison release customers

Centrelink service standards and procedures for pre-release and
post-release prison customers

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements for prison release
customers

Job Seeker Snapshot

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
