-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the Maintenance Income Test (MIT) is applied
when calculating the customer's rate of FTB Part A when child support
and/or spousal maintenance is received. It also provides information
about child support agreements.

Applying the MIT

The MIT ensures customers are better off financially if they receive
maintenance income, despite any reduction to their FTB Part A rate. If
the customer is exempt from the MIT, their FTB rate will not be affected
by any maintenance income received (unless the customer has a partial
maintenance exemption).

-   Maintenance income is always converted to an annual amount so that
    the MIT can be applied. Only maintenance income received for a child
    support child is assessed
-    The customer's Maintenance Income Free Area (MIFA) is calculated
    using only those FTB children who are also a child support child and
    attract above base rate FTB. Note: non-parent carers may have more
    than 1 active child support case in respect of a child, for example
    Grandparent may have a child support case against both parents in
    respect of a child or children. In these cases, for the purpose of
    calculating the Maintenance Income Free Area (MIFA) amount, the
    child is counted twice as they are active in more than 1 child
    support case
-   If the customer's annual maintenance income is more than their MIFA,
    the maintenance income reduction is calculated: (annual maintenance
    income - MIFA) / 2
-   The maintenance income reduction is applied to the customer's income
    tested FTB Part A rate. Note: maintenance income cannot reduce the
    customer's FTB Part A rate below the base rate for each child
    support child

For customers with children from more than 1 relationship, the MIT will
limit the amount of child support that can reduce FTB Part A by creating
an MIT Ceiling.

If a customer receives Rent Assistance (RA) with their FTB and
maintenance income has reduced their FTB Part A to the base rate, the
customer is not entitled to receive RA. This is unlike cases where FTB
has been reduced due to the Maintenance Action Test (MAT), where RA can
be paid with the income support payment.

Estimating annual maintenance income during the financial year

For FTB instalment customers, annual maintenance income details are
provided by Child Support or court order during the financial year.

If a projected reconciliation overpayment is identified due to
reassessment of maintenance income, the customer's ongoing FTB rate may
be reduced to offset the potential overpayment under mandatory
continuous adjustment.

If potential FTB arrears are identified as a result of a retrospective
change in a child support assessment, the arrears will be deferred and
included in reconciliation.

During FTB reconciliation, annualised maintenance income is recalculated
based on what the customer and partner actually received for Child
Support collect periods, and the deemed amount for private collect
periods.

For customers with a child support agreement accepted by Child Support,
if a Notional Assessment (NA) is in place it will be used to assess FTB
Part A.

FTB lump sum claims

For customers who claimed FTB via a lump sum claim for the 2008-09 to
2010-11 financial years, their maintenance income was assessed using
details advised by the customer on their claim. From 2011-12 onwards,
all claims are assessed using information from Child Support. Customers
can no longer self-assess their child support.

Maintenance Income Credit (MIC)

Customers with a child support entitlement registered for collection by
Child Support may benefit from the Maintenance Income Credit (MIC)
during FTB reconciliation or lump sum claim assessment. The MIC allows
customers to use their unused MIFA from previous years to offset the
effect of child support arrears.

Viewing MIT details

A summary of the assessment of the customer's maintenance income can be
viewed on the Rate Explanation (REXFTBA) screen.

Details of the customer's total annualised maintenance income, MIFA, MIT
ceiling and maintenance income reduction can be viewed on the FTB
Maintenance Assessment Explanation (REXFTBM) screen.

A detailed explanation of the maintenance income assessment can be
viewed from the MIT Explanation Summary (MNEX) screen.

When a child/case end is transferred by Child Support for a Child
Support Collect customer on the Disbursement method, the system
retrospectively changes the case to Private Collect and applies the full
maintenance entitlement amount.

This retrospective change in assessment results in the customer having
their annualised maintenance income assessed under the Entitlement
Method. In the majority of cases, this will result in a decrease in the
customer's ongoing rate of FTB Part A. This change in annualised
maintenance income can also invoke Mandatory Continuous Adjustment,
causing a further reduction to the customer's ongoing rate of FTB.

Note: this is not caused by incorrectly entered/ended case data or a
system problem. However, it can lead to an unintended and unexpected
reduction to the customer's ongoing rate. Occurrences of this issue must
be reported to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk for escalation. See the
Resources page for a link.

Child support agreements

Maintenance Action Test

For agreements with a start date on or after 1 July 2008, Child Support
is responsible for assessing the agreement and will transfer details
electronically to Centrelink for FTB Part A purposes. Once the agreement
is accepted by Child Support, it satisfies the MAT.

Customers with a child support agreement may choose private collection
or Child Support collection. Centrelink assumes private collect
customers will receive the full agreement amount. If a customer advises
they are not able to collect the full amount, they will need to apply
for Child Support collection or seek a child support exemption to
continue to satisfy the MAT.

Agreements with a start date prior to 1 July 2008 were assessed
differently. For more information, see the References page for a link to
the Family Assistance Guide, 3.1.6.50, Child Support Agreements (pre
July 2008)

Payer in a child support agreement increases their level of care to more
than 65%

Where a customer is a payer in a child support agreement and their level
of care increases to more than 65% and they are receiving FTB for the
child/ren, they must take reasonable steps to change from being the
payer to the payee otherwise they may be deemed to fail the Maintenance
Action Test (MAT). Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) customers provides further details on the reasonable maintenance
action requirements in these cases.

Maintenance Income Test

From 1 July 2008, customers with a child support agreement in place have
their FTB Part A assessed based on the Notional Assessment advised by
Child Support. In some cases, the Administrative Assessment is used, for
example, some lump sum agreements.

Annualised maintenance income at FTB reconciliation (for 2008-09
onwards):

If the customer was private collect the Notional Assessment is used

Child Support collect customers who have:

-   no arrears collected, the value of the agreement collected will be
    applied in a formula to the Notional Assessment to produce a
    Notional Assessed amount, and this amount will be used
-    collected arrears, the Total Maintenance Amount will be used. The
    formula is: Notional Assessment notional arrears (normal arrears x
    Notional Factor) + normal arrears

If a Notional Assessment was not in place, the Administrative Assessment
is used for private collect customers and the actual amount collected is
used for Child Support collect customers

Maintenance Income Credit (MIC) calculations

For Maintenance Income Credit (MIC) calculations for Child Support
collect customers, see Maintenance Income Credit (MIC).

Initial assessment - agreement for child support lodged

For information about the initial assessment when a customer lodges an
agreement for child support payments with Child Support, see Family Tax
Benefit customer wants to register a child support agreement.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia Website,
Level 2 Policy Helpdesk intranet pages, Family Assistance Payment Rates
(FPR006),examples of applying the MIT and calculating the MIT Ceiling
and examples of the automatic assessment of maintenance income for
customers with a child support agreement from 1 July 2008.

Contents

Determining if a payment is child support/ maintenance income for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB)

Disbursement Method

Entitlement Method

Modified Entitlement Method

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer receives spousal maintenance

Relevant period for maintenance for Maintenance Income Test (MIT)

Deductible Child Maintenance Expenditure

Related links

Apportionment of income/maintenance reduction for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) Part A

Assessing capitalised maintenance income for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Assessing child support received for child disability expenses for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Calculating and recording the Maintenance Income Credit (MIC) for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer wants to register a child support
agreement

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Health Care Card (HCC)

Health Care Card (HCC) not renewed/issued for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) codes

Maintenance Income Credit (MIC)

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Non-cash maintenance income assessment for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Recording child support details for a previous year Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) claim

Recording private maintenance income on Centrelink systems

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
