-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains what to do when an FTB instalment or lump sum
claim customer wants to apply for an exemption from taking action to
obtain child support. An exemption may be granted if the customer does
not know the identity of the child's other parent or if circumstances
make it unreasonable for them to seek child support from the other
parent.

Explore options before referring for, or granting a full exemption

In some cases, it is not appropriate for a customer to take action to
obtain child support. If the customer is required to take action, make
sure the customer understands the purpose of child support before
considering an exemption. For example:

-   child support is for the financial benefit of the child
-   child support improves the financial resources for children not
    living with both parents
-   children are entitled to receive support from both parents, and
-   child support does not have to involve contact between the parents

If the customer has a current child support case and indicates they are
unable to collect their entitlement, other options must be explored.
These might include:

-   a private collect customer asking Child Support to collect on their
    behalf
-   a Child Support collect customer being assessed under the
    disbursement method
-   a partial exemption where they can continue to receive some child
    support

The customer may apply for an exemption if they must take action to
obtain child support and there are circumstances that make it
unreasonable for them to do so.

Application for an exemption from taking action to obtain child support

An application for an exemption is the customer's choice. Customers must
be advised of the implications of their choice. This includes that an
application for child support will not be backdated if the exemption is
not granted.

A customer's right not to discuss sensitive matters must be respected.
No sensitive information should be recorded on a customer's record. The
Resources page has a link to the Privacy and Secrecy page, which defines
'What is sensitive information?'

If an FTB customer applies for an exemption, they are taken to satisfy
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) until a decision is made. If the
customer is seeking an exemption from the MAT, the progress of this
request will be reviewed in 60 days.

The customer also has 13 weeks (91 days) to satisfy the MAT. This is
called the Deciding Maintenance Action (DMA) period. If the request for
an exemption is rejected and their DMA period has ended, they have 14
days from the date they are advised of the rejection to take reasonable
action before their FTB Part A is reduced to the base rate.

Parentage unknown

The customer should apply for a parentage (other parent) unknown
exemption when:

-   they do not know who the other parent is and
-   the other parent is not named on the birth certificate

If the customer does know who the other parent is, a parentage unknown
exemption is not applicable even if the other parent is not named on the
birth certificate. Unless another exemption (such as family and domestic
violence) needs to be explored, customers should seek legal advice in
proving parentage.

Exemptions for child support may require assessment by a social worker.
Some 'Parentage Unknown 'exemptions and 'Artificial Conception
Procedure' cases are assessed by Service Officers. Maintenance Action
Test (MAT) codes has information about specific exemptions and whether
social worker involvement is required. That procedure should be
consulted before a referral to the social worker is made.

Shared care and exemptions

In situations where the customers share the care of a child or if each
parent has one or more children in care, only one child support case
will be registered.

If details of a child support case are transferred from Child Support
for a customer who had been granted an exemption, a new exemption should
be assessed following customer contact. If it is found the exemption
still applies and the child support case is to be ended Centrelink will
advise Child Support. The Resources page has an example.

Partial exemptions for child support

A partial exemption may be granted in private collect cases where a
customer:

is unable to collect their full entitlement, but it is not appropriate
for them to transfer the responsibility of collection to Child Support

a customer:

-   had a retrospective increase to their private collect child support
    assessment, and
-   is unable to collect the arrears from the payer, and
-   provides a letter from a legal practitioner advising they cannot
    assist the customer as it would not be cost effective to do so

A partial exemption allows the customer to collect whatever they can
privately (or to be re-reconciled on the amount they actually received).
Their rate of FTB Part A is based on the amount of child support they
actually receive rather than the amount of the child support assessment.

A partial exemption can also be granted where a customer is unable to
apply for a child support assessment due to exceptional circumstances
like the threat of violence, but can privately collect some form of
maintenance from the other parent. For example, the other parent pays
non-cash maintenance in the form of rent expenses.

Backdating exemptions

If the circumstances existed previously, exemptions may be backdated.
This may be appropriate for instalment or lump sum customers who are
collecting child support privately or customers who do not have an
existing child support case.

Grounds for backdating an exemption are established through an
assessment of whether the circumstances existed before the date of claim
for the entire backdated period.

Special circumstances do not need to be established to backdate an
exemption to 1 July of the previous financial year. In order to backdate
any further however, special circumstances for backdating a maintenance
action exemption must first be established.

Backdating an exemption for a customer who was not previously meeting
the MAT may result in an arrears payment.

In cases where arrears generate and the customer has an existing debt,
there must be sufficient grounds for a temporary exclusion from debt
offsetting to be approved. When exceptional or unforeseen circumstances
apply which may cause the customer to suffer severe financial hardship,
customers can request to be temporarily excluded from debt recovery
before money being taken from their FTB arrears, lump sum or top-up
payments.
See Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment,
reconciliation and claim processing.

Child Support collection period and full exemptions

Customers granted an exemption should contact Child Support to end the
case. For example, there are family and domestic violence concerns and
they have a current child support case.

The customer can also elect to discharge any arrears on the case.
Discharging the arrears may help in stopping more family and domestic
violence issues, and will not have any impact on the FTB rate for the
backdated or ongoing period. The customer's annual FTB entitlement will
be recalculated at reconciliation, based on the actual amount of child
support received throughout the year. This effectively means that there
is no need to backdate exemptions for this customer group.

For social workers

If a full exemption is being considered for a customer who has arrears
accrued for a previous Child Support collect period and the customer
elects not to 'discharge' the arrears, it may indicate that an exemption
is not appropriate. If the customer collects the arrears, they will be
used in the MIT calculation at reconciliation.

Private collect child support and backdated (full) exemptions

When a customer has a private collect child support case and there are
family and domestic violence concerns present, it may be appropriate to
backdate an exemption. The backdating of the exemption is to offset the
effect of child support that the customer was deemed to have received,
but may not have received due to the family and domestic violence
circumstances. This allows Centrelink to reassess the customer's FTB
entitlement based on the actual amount of child support they received
during this period. If the customer is eligible for arrears of FTB, they
will be assessed after the end of the relevant financial year/s, when
reconciliation occurs.

In cases where arrears generate and the customer has an existing debt,
there must be sufficient grounds for a temporary exclusion from debt
offsetting to be approved. When exceptional or unforeseen circumstances
apply which may cause the customer to suffer severe financial hardship,
customers can request to be temporarily excluded from debt recovery
before money being taken from their FTB arrears, lump sum or top-up
payments.
See Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment,
reconciliation and claim processing.

As Child Support are only able to end a case from the day after the
request is made (that is, they are unable to backdate the case end),
additional coding is required by Centrelink to remove the uncollected
child support so that it will not be included in the FTB rate
calculation.

Ending a child support case

To end a case, the customer must lodge a request with Child Support. The
Ending a child support assessment (CS1671) form may be used however
Child Support will still need to speak with the customer before they can
end the case. The Resources page has a link.

If the customer or their partner are receiving FTB Part A at more than
the base rate, they can elect to voluntarily end their child support
case. However, their FTB Part A rate may be reduced to base rate if they
have not applied for/been given a Maintenance Action Test (MAT)
exemption. For more details see Effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) where
the customer elects to suspend or end a child support assessment.

When a social worker grants a full exemption, they must refer the
customer to Child Support immediately to request the case be ended. If
they are unable to transfer the customer, they must email Child Support
using the 'Maintenance Exemption Notification to Child Support'
template. The Resources page has a link.

Family and domestic violence cases

If the care of the child/ren is shared or divided between the parties to
a child support case, a parent can elect to end the child support
assessment for:

any child for whom they are assessed to receive child support from the
other parent. If a parent has a child support entitlement of $0 but more
than 65% care of the child, they can end the case for that child

all the children of the case, if:

-   the assessed annual rate of child support for both parties is $0,
    and
-   the parent has an exemption because of family and domestic violence
    (even if one or more of the children are solely in the other
    parent’s care)

Where ending the case might create further family and domestic violence,
a partial exemption may be considered but only if the child support case
is private collect.

Note: ending a case can result in some payees becoming a payer in a
case. Becoming the payer in a case satisfies the Maintenance Action
Test.

If the recipient chooses to end the child support assessment for the
child/ren in their own care, they must be advised they may become the
payer for the children in the other parent's care.

If an FTB recipient is or would be the payer, they are considered as
having taken reasonable maintenance action for a child by having the
children in their care taken into account in the child support case.
However, where a domestic violence exemption has been granted for the
payee and the alleged perpetrators care of the FTB child/ren increases,
or their Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) decreases and they subsequently
become a potential payee, the alleged perpetrator may then apply for
child support and they are entitled to do so. For policy advice contact
the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk. The Resources page has a link.

Exception

In some cases, 2 carers may be entitled to child support for the same
child. For example a grandparent and a parent.

In these cases, a joint election to end the case is required from both
carers. When a joint election cannot be obtained from both carers and
there is family violence involved, it may be appropriate to discuss a
partial exemption for the parent carer as an alternative option to
ending the case.

There is no MAT requirement in respect of a non-parent carer and
therefore they are not required to apply for an exemption (such as
violence). The Level 2 Policy Helpdesk can assist if policy advice is
needed.

The Resources page contains:

-   link for Privacy and Secrecy
-   link for the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk
-   scenarios about child support exemptions
-   approved text for letters to customers
-   child support email template, and
-   contact details for the Technical Support Line, Child Support and
    social workers

Related links

Backdating a Maintenance Action Test (MAT) exemption to take action to
receive child support prior to 1 July of the previous financial year

Centrelink action on proving parentage for child support

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) where the customer elects to suspend
or end a child support assessment

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and child support for children born as a result
of a surrogacy arrangement or via artificial conception procedure
(including children of same-sex couples)

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) codes

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Referrals to legal advice for action to obtain child support to satisfy
Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Social Work Services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
